[Amit Varma]: When we think of ourselves, we think of ourselves as something fixed.
[Amit Varma]: This is what I am.
[Amit Varma]: This is no accident.
[Amit Varma]: Even if we accept that some aspects of ourselves are contingent, we hold that others are essential.
[Amit Varma]: One of those, oddly enough, can be musical taste.
[Amit Varma]: Think of the music you like.
[Amit Varma]: To like that kind of music almost seems hardwired into you, doesn't it?
[Amit Varma]: You may discover stuff through your peers or your environment, but what you like feels
[Amit Varma]: a part of what you are.
[Amit Varma]: Well, here's a thought experiment.
[Amit Varma]: What if you were born in North Africa?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of music would you have liked then?
[Amit Varma]: Or interior Jharkhand?
[Amit Varma]: Or Iceland?
[Amit Varma]: Or Peru?
[Amit Varma]: Or Kazakhstan?
[Amit Varma]: It's likely that your favorite artist would have been someone you haven't even heard of
[Amit Varma]: right now.
[Amit Varma]: It's also possible that all the music you take with you to a desert island today would
[Amit Varma]: be stuff that you'd never discover in this thought experiment world.
[Amit Varma]: But my point is not that all our tastes are contingent on accidents like the accident
[Amit Varma]: of birth.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I believe the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: I believe that our brains are wired to find pleasures in certain kinds of sound, and that
[Amit Varma]: there is something universal in music everywhere, however different it may seem to us.
[Amit Varma]: We can find rapture in Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan or Led Zeppelin or Tenorivan, and that rapture
[Amit Varma]: is rooted in the human condition, in the effect that music has on us.
[Amit Varma]: And it's basically the same rapture.
[Amit Varma]: It may seem at a superficial level that we are different like our music is different.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, the music isn't different.
[Amit Varma]: There is a universal pentatonic.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Serendipity is a strange thing.
[Amit Varma]: In January this year, I released an episode with my friend Chuck Gopal, in which we riffed
[Amit Varma]: on the Beatles for a while.
[Amit Varma]: In response to that, Warren Mendonca of Blackstrat Blues said on Twitter that the next time we
[Amit Varma]: discuss the Beatles, he wanted to be in on it.
[Amit Varma]: Warren is a legend of the indie music scene.
[Amit Varma]: And while I hadn't even heard all his stuff, I loved some of the early work that I had
[Amit Varma]: heard, such as Anuva Sky, which has been on my playlist of comfort music for years.
[Amit Varma]: So I jumped at the chance to ask him on the show and to go a little deeper into his work
[Amit Varma]: and his art.
[Amit Varma]: And because I felt my musical knowledge was not good enough to go as deep as I wanted,
[Amit Varma]: I asked Chuck to be my co-host for the episode.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm so grateful that Chuck agreed.
[Amit Varma]: He came over to my place, so we were both in my home studio while Warren recorded remotely
[Amit Varma]: from his home in Auckland.
[Amit Varma]: I love this episode, not just because of this conversation, but also because it took me
[Amit Varma]: on a superb journey of discovering that part of Warren's music that I hadn't heard yet.
[Amit Varma]: I've been driving people nuts by playing Ode to a Sunny Day on repeat.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to this conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: One of the themes of this episode is that even though all music has local flavour, music
[Amit Varma]: itself is universal.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you can turn that around when it comes to crime.
[Amit Varma]: Human nature is twisted and crime is everywhere, but it has a local flavour everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: This episode is sponsored by a podcast that is all about desi crime.
[Amit Varma]: Aishwarya Singh and Aryan Misra are the hosts of the Desi Crime podcast, which covers crimes
[Amit Varma]: from India, Pakistan, Nepal, basically any place you'd call desi.
[Amit Varma]: Their show description has this sentence which hooked me right away.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, crimes that take place in the Indian subcontinent aren't remotely similar to Western
[Amit Varma]: crimes.
[Amit Varma]: Desi crimes are gory, complicated, corrupt, and hardly documented.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Aishwarya and Aryan take us on a wild ride as they tell us these gory and complicated
[Amit Varma]: stories.
[Amit Varma]: They tell us about the most prolific murderer in history, Thug Bairam.
[Amit Varma]: They give us the inside dope on the massacre of the Nepali royal family.
[Amit Varma]: We get suicide pacts and police brutality, disappearing journalists and charming serial
[Amit Varma]: killers.
[Amit Varma]: If you like storytelling and crime interests you, you should listen to the Desi Crime podcast.
[Amit Varma]: You can find it on Apple, Spotify, Amazon Music, wherever you listen to your podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So check out the Desi Crime podcast, there is no better way to kill time.
[Amit Varma]: Warren and Chuck, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Oh, thank you.
[Unknown]: It's a pleasure to be here.
[Unknown]: And thank you for having me as a co-host.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so, you know, in the spirit of how these episodes sometimes go, let's just talk about
[Amit Varma]: what we were talking about in the moment, which is that we had great trouble getting
[Amit Varma]: Chuck's mic to work.
[Amit Varma]: And he finally got it to work.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, as soon as it started working that I'm not going to touch anything, right?
[Amit Varma]: Something like that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, something of that sort.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And Warren, you mentioned you had a story about that.
[Amit Varma]: So let's start with the story.
[Guest]: Okay, the story is, I used to be in a band called Zero.
[Guest]: And we used to practice in this old house in Shivaji Park called Uday Vihar.
[Guest]: Now being an old house, you know, of like, I think, 30s or 40s or whenever it was built,
[Guest]: the electric grounding was a bit suspect.
[Guest]: So when we used to practice, first of all, we used to get shocks from each other.
[Guest]: If one person touched the other person, it was like a severe jhatka.
[Guest]: So we learned not to touch each other while practicing, you know.
[Guest]: So the issue then became with distortion, all that noise became amplified.
[Guest]: So you had to find a way of grounding the amplifiers.
[Guest]: So me being electrical engineering student knew that there was a water pipe running outside.
[Guest]: So we got some sandpaper, cleaned it a little bit, put a wire around it, soldered it in
[Guest]: place, brought that wire in and grounded the amps.
[Guest]: Problem became in the monsoon, the connection would become intermittent.
[Guest]: So Raji had to go outside while we were playing our guitars and jiggle the wire till the noise
[Guest]: was gone.
[Guest]: And then he was told, okay, leave it, leave it, don't touch anything, it's just fine right
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: And then again, if the noise came, he would have to go out and repeat the process.
[Guest]: Then a few months, I think, later, we got complaints that your guys are too loud, neighbors
[Guest]: are complaining.
[Guest]: So we figured the room we were practicing in was the first room closest to the main
[Guest]: road.
[Guest]: So we said we'll go to the next room.
[Guest]: When we went to the next room, the power was grounded over there.
[Guest]: And we realized we could have just taken an extension box and plugged it into that room.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's such, you know, such Jugaadu lives kind of musicians live with, you know, I remember
[Amit Varma]: reading somewhere that a musician's best friend is duct tape.
[Amit Varma]: So this episode really happened when you heard the episode between Chuck and me and you said
[Amit Varma]: next time we discuss you discuss the Beatles kindly call me.
[Amit Varma]: So here we are.
[Amit Varma]: Now there's a lot we want to discuss apart from the Beatles, but we thought a nice way
[Amit Varma]: to kind of get it going is actually to talk about the Beatles because I you know, in one
[Amit Varma]: of your interviews, I read something moving where you said that, you know, the most memorable
[Amit Varma]: memory from your childhood, as it were, was when you heard the Beatles for the first time.
[Amit Varma]: So tell us a little bit about, you know, what they meant to you and what they have meant
[Amit Varma]: to you since.
[Guest]: Well, from the moment I was a kid, and I could barely talk, like my aunt who used to live
[Guest]: with us at the time, had this big poster of the Beatles, so I'd learned all their names,
[Guest]: you know, as we say, John, Paul, George Ringo and everything.
[Guest]: So, you know, that was like the awareness for, you know, who the Beatles were when I
[Guest]: was from a young age.
[Guest]: And it was a bit later, I think, when I was around eight, after I went through a beef
[Guest]: MC Hammer phase, someone gave me this compilation cassette, and there was a Beatles medley in
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And it was one of those, you know, the now party, whatever, you know, this compilation
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: And that Beatles medley, suddenly of all the songs that made the most sense to me, age
[Guest]: eight.
[Guest]: So I said, what is this?
[Guest]: I went to my dad, who's also a musician, and he said, well, you know, you should probably
[Guest]: get into the Beatles at this point, you'll kind of, you know, understand a little bit
[Guest]: more about the, you know, the basics of music and everything like that.
[Guest]: So I tried getting my hands, we had some cassettes at home, so I listened to that.
[Guest]: And then my uncle had the motherlode, he had all the albums on vinyl.
[Guest]: My dad's sister's husband, his name is Kalayil, awesome guy.
[Guest]: So he used to give me one by one, like a lending library vinyl, I used to take it to the local
[Guest]: guy who had one vinyl player and one cassette deck, and he would do the transfer because
[Guest]: I didn't have a working, you know, vinyl player at home.
[Guest]: So all these cassette transfers became then like my textbook, you know.
[Guest]: So I think between age eight to 13, I literally did not listen to anything else.
[Guest]: That was it.
[Guest]: So every single album, everything went into, you know, and I used to sit with my guitar
[Guest]: and slowly, slowly tried.
[Guest]: And then I found out how to slow down the tape, learn solos in half speed and stuff
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: And for bass lines, you have to speed up the tape so you could hear the bass more clearly,
[Guest]: all that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: So then, you know, kind of what I became as a musician, a large part of that came from
[Guest]: that initial grounding experience, because at the same time, I started, you know, sitting
[Guest]: with the guitar a little bit more seriously.
[Unknown]: So there you go, that's the, that's the Beatles story for you.
[Unknown]: So one follow up question that I'll ask is, interestingly, also, you said, that was your
[Unknown]: basic grounding, and you have two grounding stories really over there, but two different
[Unknown]: kinds of grounding entirely.
[Unknown]: Anyone who listens to the Beatles now, it's very apparent that there's been an evolution
[Unknown]: right from the early, I want to say boy band phase, right to the later psychedelic and
[Unknown]: experimental phase.
[Unknown]: But how did you react to that as a eight to 13 year old, were you able to track that evolution?
[Unknown]: Did you hear the albums chronologically?
[Unknown]: Just curious to hear about, you know, something like that.
[Guest]: The older I got, the more sense the later albums made to me.
[Guest]: So initially, the, you know, the initial, the first early albums, Please Please Me,
[Guest]: the first two or three albums, that was what I gravitated to most.
[Guest]: And then obviously, there are songs on the later albums, like Let It Be and Hey Jude,
[Guest]: which are very accessible.
[Guest]: So I still love those as well.
[Guest]: But then the first time I heard a song like Tomorrow Never Knows, I got really scared.
[Guest]: I was like, I don't think I'm supposed to be listening to this music.
[Guest]: It's kind of like weird and everything.
[Guest]: So I kind of put that on the back burner.
[Guest]: And then, you know, as you go closer to puberty, all that stuff starts making a little bit
[Unknown]: more sense to you.
[Unknown]: So you did listen to them chronologically?
[Guest]: I tried to, I mean, I can still tell you like, which album comes after what, and it's like,
[Guest]: so you know, well etched in my mind, the moment one song stops, I can hear the next song starting.
[Guest]: My daughter thinks I'm nuts because I start singing the next song and then it starts.
[Amit Varma]: That must be spooky.
[Amit Varma]: I read this essay by Ted Joya recently, or I think it was in his interview with Tyler
[Amit Varma]: Carvin where he mentioned how the Beatles for those five or six years, the significant
[Amit Varma]: thing about them was they kept evolving every five, six months.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason according to him that was important is that every time you have somebody who becomes
[Amit Varma]: a breakthrough hit, what they're doing becomes a formula.
[Amit Varma]: And people immediately rush to imitate that and copy that and they were changing every
[Amit Varma]: six months.
[Amit Varma]: And his point was, look, they do something in 1964.
[Amit Varma]: The monkeys comes along and does something really similar.
[Amit Varma]: But by the time the monkeys is out, they moved on.
[Amit Varma]: And they're moving on over a period.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, would you then say that it's kind of listening to the Beatles discography
[Amit Varma]: is like an accelerated education in music also, where you're just getting so many different
[Amit Varma]: styles from your really basic pop song, like the early stuff to, you know, much more complicated
[Amit Varma]: stuff later on?
[Guest]: Yeah, certainly.
[Guest]: But I mean, even by the second or the third album, you could hear like them changing things
[Guest]: like in She Loves You, for example, she loves you.
[Guest]: And then one minor chord comes in like the four minor.
[Guest]: That's like something that you wouldn't have heard, you know, a little while before.
[Guest]: So you can sense that sophistication coming in really quickly.
[Guest]: I think also what happens is the moment an artist experiences some kind of mass success,
[Guest]: there's all this kind of acceptance that comes in, you know, so you feel more, you're more
[Guest]: likely to take risks, because you know that, you know, otherwise, always wondering, will
[Guest]: people like it?
[Guest]: But now they come to a point in popularity where like, everyone loves what they do.
[Guest]: So it makes sense for them to take those risks.
[Guest]: And you can see the acceleration is really quick.
[Guest]: By the time they became popular, because by the time I think 63 was the first album.
[Guest]: Before that, they had spent years playing covers in Hamburg and the repertoire was vast.
[Guest]: They would have listened to like everything from jazz and you know, whatever top 40 and
[Guest]: I was going in to the rock and roll and everything like that.
[Guest]: So huge range of influences already.
[Guest]: And that's kind of already percolating.
[Guest]: And by the time the first album hits, you can see this, you know, from 63, please Mr.
[Guest]: Postman, 66, Sargent Pepper comes along.
[Guest]: That's three years.
[Guest]: That's ridiculous.
[Unknown]: Yeah, one of the things that we started our conversation, Amit, with was, I had a theory
[Unknown]: that if the discography of the Beatles was slightly flipped, and Sargent Pepper for some
[Unknown]: magical reason was the first album, and then Please Please Me, etc. came later, that the
[Unknown]: history of music would have been completely different because the Beatles wouldn't have
[Unknown]: had that initial fan base and then something experimental like Sargent Pepper wouldn't
[Unknown]: have had a mass audience to be tested out on.
[Unknown]: And that's something we debated and we'd love to know what you think about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think for sure.
[Guest]: Because even a guy like John Mayer, if you notice his career, the initial albums are
[Guest]: a little bit more poppy and you know, designed to get into the mainstream really quickly.
[Guest]: Once those two or three albums go by, and you become a household name, that's when you
[Guest]: see, hey man, I'm going to take some risks and, you know, do something different.
[Guest]: And plus, what happens is then the people who are controlling the money supply are less
[Guest]: likely to worry.
[Guest]: They're saying, this guy knows what he's doing, let's let him do it, don't need to get involved.
[Guest]: So then you have those abilities to do that, otherwise there's always someone saying, hey,
[Guest]: make it more like this, or make it more like that, or maybe your pants should be blue,
[Guest]: and your shoes should be green, you know, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: And that kind of gets in the way of a certain creative flow.
[Guest]: Because sometimes when too many people make those decisions, the art tends to suffer.
[Unknown]: Yeah, I think that's a great business lesson itself over there for a company who's already
[Unknown]: popular or something.
[Unknown]: If they're launching something experimental, then it's likely that that will find acceptance
[Unknown]: with investors as well as audiences.
[Unknown]: But that's just me extrapolating what you said.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't think it would work in a business context.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think, you know, one day you're a startup, you innovate in some way, you're
[Amit Varma]: a disruptor.
[Amit Varma]: But once you become a big company, then you become set in your ways, your incentives are
[Amit Varma]: for just keep on doing the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess I want to ask a question that in fact, I asked all the historians who come
[Amit Varma]: on the show.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it's particularly apt when you're talking about the Beatles.
[Amit Varma]: Now there's something, a gent named Thomas Carlyle had come up with something called
[Amit Varma]: the great man theory of history.
[Amit Varma]: And there are really two schools of thought on this.
[Amit Varma]: But Carlyle's great man theory of history really postulates that history is made by
[Amit Varma]: great man at some point.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, back in those days, everything was a male gender.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, the great man and not the great person theory.
[Amit Varma]: But the idea being that there'll be a great person, they'll do something great and history
[Amit Varma]: changes.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas the counterpoint to that is that no, there are currents in history which are happening
[Amit Varma]: anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And things are going to go where they're going to go.
[Amit Varma]: And people don't, individuals don't matter so much.
[Amit Varma]: So in the context of the Beatles, how would you look at that?
[Amit Varma]: Like, my sense is that music history would have been vastly different if say, if John
[Amit Varma]: and Paul hadn't met, you know, you know, you can pick your sort of great man equivalent
[Amit Varma]: of choice, you could pick Led Zeppelin, you could pick Dylan, depending on what you're
[Amit Varma]: going to listen to.
[Amit Varma]: So is that something you'd kind of tend to agree with?
[Amit Varma]: Or would you say that there are currents which are going in a particular way, even if you
[Amit Varma]: didn't have that specific group, music would have, you know, continued evolving in the
[Amit Varma]: same kind of way?
[Guest]: What's your sense?
[Guest]: I think it's also down to the level of influence they had among other bands, you know, there
[Guest]: was a lot of other bands that were very influenced by what they were doing.
[Guest]: I mean, we're the first guys to actually start writing their own songs, if you look at it,
[Guest]: because it was a lot of that, you know, A&R, we'll get the song from somebody, give it
[Guest]: to the singer to sing.
[Guest]: And these guys come along.
[Guest]: And there's also that class thing, which was broken down because they were these, you know,
[Guest]: Northern England people.
[Guest]: So in that English sense, they kind of opened up the thing.
[Guest]: And then the crossover to America, then that cross-pollination, which had been happening
[Guest]: is blown wide open, you know.
[Guest]: So in that sense, you can't discount like, you know, musically aside, if you're just
[Guest]: looking at historically, that would have definitely changed.
[Guest]: There wouldn't be an Aerosmith without the Beatles, or a vast number of other bands like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think you'd have the opportunity for, let's say, what's like a not as famous
[Guest]: British band, let's say Jets Hotel.
[Guest]: Jets Hotel wouldn't have the ability to be popular in America unless that initial barrier
[Guest]: had been broken down.
[Guest]: And who did it?
[Unknown]: It was them.
[Unknown]: Interesting.
[Unknown]: So it's not just musically.
[Unknown]: Another way of phrasing Amit's question, and this is something I often think about is,
[Unknown]: which artist, if removed from rock history would have had the maximum ripple effect across?
[Unknown]: And it's another way of phrasing the question that you asked is the great man theory.
[Unknown]: But any name that springs to mind for you?
[Guest]: Hendrix.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, not just guitar players.
[Guest]: A lot of other musicians were.
[Guest]: I mean, Miles Davis was very interested in what Hendrix was doing.
[Amit Varma]: So that only goes to show.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: So, so let's, let's start by, you know, where my shows often start, which is kind of your
[Amit Varma]: personal history.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you were born in the right when the 70s were ending, you grew up in Dadar, tell
[Amit Varma]: us a little bit about what your childhood was like, because, like, I'm a little older
[Amit Varma]: than you.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember back in those days, just, you know, you couldn't, the stuff people today
[Amit Varma]: take for granted, like you can listen to any music in the world and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: We couldn't take that shit for granted.
[Amit Varma]: It was such a big deal and such an achievement to put a mixtape together.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you discovered music by a band, you would have to scrounge high and dry for
[Amit Varma]: some other album by them, even for information about, like, who are these guys and all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell us something about sort of the texture of your childhood growing up and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what those years were like.
[Guest]: So, I mean, I was, I was very lucky in that sense, because I was born into a musical family.
[Guest]: So I was already surrounded by, you know, music, the act of creating it, the act of
[Guest]: listening to it, all of that.
[Guest]: And the access to music, obviously, wasn't as good as it was now.
[Guest]: But at least, you know, my, my dad had good taste.
[Guest]: So a lot of, you know, his cassettes became like part of my education, like when I wanted
[Guest]: to listen to Clapton, he gave me all the cream stuff.
[Guest]: He said, listen to that first, you know.
[Guest]: So at least I had that.
[Guest]: And then I had uncles and my dad's friends, other musicians who would drop in, you know,
[Guest]: and give some, like my uncle Loi, he, at the time I was a kid, he used to live in Delhi.
[Guest]: So he used to come down once in a while and every time, like, he would come down, little
[Guest]: one little nugget of yarn, you know, my first rock and roll riff or something like that,
[Guest]: I would get from him.
[Guest]: When I was just one, we didn't have a TV at home.
[Guest]: That came when I was like, say, four or five goes on black and white number and again,
[Guest]: you know, what TV was like at that time, there was nothing in the English sense, it was like
[Guest]: basically government messages and some, you know, in fact, I think my, my brother was
[Guest]: the one he started calling everyone to watch TV when the ads came on because the ads were
[Guest]: in English.
[Guest]: Hey, the ads are on.
[Guest]: And there was some cool jingle or something or the other.
[Guest]: So at least that was culturally, you know, relevant.
[Guest]: So I never really got into any of the, you know, Indian classical music or anything like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: In fact, it was almost like an imposition at times, like, can we please escape from
[Guest]: this, give us something apart from this.
[Guest]: And you know, that Sunday morning, He-Man used to come on, that was like one escape.
[Guest]: Then there was another program, there's this German thing called Transtell, at least it
[Guest]: was not in Hindi, so, you know, it was a little bit more understandable.
[Guest]: And you know, things like that.
[Guest]: And once in a while, something would come on, and then suddenly a world would light
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: And I remember watching like, see that Eagles, hell freezes over, they put that was like,
[Guest]: you know, more towards the 90s or whatever, by then things had gotten a bit better.
[Guest]: But just the, you know, the whole retrieval of information became like, every little nugget
[Guest]: was, you know, treasured, and like how they do sugarcane juice, they remove every last
[Guest]: bit of juice, so that became a little bit more valuable.
[Guest]: Now the information is so widely available, even in fact, if I give you like the best
[Guest]: advice in the world, there's a chance it will just get wasted.
[Guest]: You know, someone will think I was just another person giving some gyaan, there's a chance
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: You know, so it's a very different world we live in today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, you know, one of your Black Shadows albums is called The Last Analog Generation.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you mentioned about how when your daughter was born, you kind of wanted
[Amit Varma]: to document what has gone and we are the last analog generation in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So when you look at the way that she's growing up, for example, and you think of the way
[Amit Varma]: that you grew up, what are the differences that you see in terms of how you're discovering
[Amit Varma]: music, how you're experiencing music or anything else for that matter?
[Amit Varma]: Like not in terms of lamenting the good old days, or not in terms of passing a value judgment
[Amit Varma]: of one generation having a better time than the other, but just in terms of differences,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what have you noticed?
[Guest]: I mean, at this age, she's still getting a lot of the music from the parents, you know,
[Guest]: so our tastes, you know, but now she is starting to discover like, I like certain things.
[Guest]: So she'll make me make a playlist of her favorite songs that is then bhajaud ad infinitum in
[Guest]: the car.
[Guest]: So, you know, we add her mercy, can we please not listen to that same song again?
[Guest]: But apart from that, it's, I've noticed, like, as we get older, we get a little bit more
[Guest]: judgmental about what is good and what is bad, where she doesn't have that, you know,
[Guest]: if she likes it, she likes it, you know, she's not really analyzing it to that extent.
[Guest]: It's got a good beat.
[Guest]: That's the main thing.
[Guest]: It's got a good melody, the chord changes are nice, notes, weird notes and stuff like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: It's all good.
[Guest]: So I used to be the same way when I was a kid, you know, in that sense, humans are built
[Guest]: in similar ways, where it will change is when she gets a little bit older, and she wants
[Guest]: to, you know, like one of my nieces, I think is around 14 or 15.
[Guest]: Oh, no, now she must be 16 or something.
[Guest]: So she was listening to Thin Lizzy.
[Guest]: I was like, oh, you like Thin Lizzy, you know, and I gave her a few recommendations and I
[Guest]: was like, whatever, good uncle and everything.
[Guest]: But it's cool.
[Guest]: I mean, I think the good music will still find an audience, you know, the ones who are
[Guest]: ready to look for it.
[Guest]: For them, it's easier now than ever, you know, you just go to Spotify or whatever and say,
[Guest]: give me your best of Thin Lizzy and otherwise I had to go to the shop and order the cassette
[Guest]: which took like a month to come, you know, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So, you know, I don't know, it's kind of interesting, because in a certain way, humans will always
[Guest]: be built a certain way.
[Guest]: And in ways the ease of access is going to definitely be a fully different way of doing
[Unknown]: things.
[Unknown]: I actually wanted to ask a little later, but it makes so much sense asking it now, which
[Unknown]: is we will have a conversation on form versus content and all that later.
[Unknown]: But do you think that in some sense, what music itself is changing, like when you were
[Unknown]: growing up, and when we were growing up, it was audio only.
[Unknown]: And today, it's almost hard to separate out music from say, a music video or to a completely
[Unknown]: new generation, like your niece, it might be the associated TikTok meme or something
[Unknown]: like that.
[Unknown]: Do you think that has a bearing on the music itself that, oh, there's also an associated
[Unknown]: music video?
[Unknown]: Like I can't think of do I want to know without thinking of that, that that music, that iconic
[Unknown]: music video, for instance, is that something you thought about?
[Guest]: I think with every generation, there'll always be curious ones.
[Guest]: And there'll always be ones will just follow the trend and listen to whatever's dished
[Guest]: out to them.
[Guest]: There'll be ones who are prepared to look and dig deeper.
[Guest]: And those ones will find it.
[Guest]: But I don't know, in terms of percentages, you know, how many of them will be one versus
[Guest]: the other.
[Guest]: You know, but there'll always be people I'm telling with every generation, there'll be
[Guest]: someone who's listening to BB King or whatever, there'll be someone who's as long as it's
[Guest]: there, it's accessible.
[Guest]: For example, if his music has gone from all the servers or something like that, then it
[Guest]: may be a little bit tough.
[Guest]: Then they'll have to go and dig out vinyls and find a vinyl player to play it and all
[Guest]: that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: But as long as it's available, you know, and the ease of access also becomes a big part
[Guest]: of the thing, because if you notice like the ones whose videos are easily found on on YouTube,
[Guest]: for example, will be, you know, getting across to younger listeners more easily than the
[Unknown]: ones who don't.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: Mike, the question, though, I was actually getting it was is what we consider as music
[Unknown]: is that changing from only audio to something that is audio plus visual and who knows when
[Unknown]: in the metaverse it might be audio plus visual plus how you're feeling and all that.
[Guest]: That's really what I was getting to.
[Guest]: It's always been changing ever since MTV came out, you know, which was what, 1981, you know.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: The moment it became visual, there was no turning back from that.
[Guest]: And then it'll only go further from being a purely audio form, you know.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm still able to listen to music without any distractions.
[Guest]: Once in a while, maybe I'll pick up my phone and, you know, if a message comes on or something
[Guest]: like which is why I tend to like disable notifications on all devices like fuck that.
[Guest]: If I want to check it, I'll check it.
[Guest]: Otherwise, don't tell me when to check, you know, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: But, I mean, it's going to be different for different people.
[Guest]: Different people will have the ability to devote their attention span to listening to
[Guest]: an entire album, A Dark Side of the Moon, for example.
[Guest]: And the first time you listen to it, it'll blow your mind, you know, but then who wants
[Guest]: to listen to it?
[Guest]: You have to see how many of them are there versus the ones who, you know, think money
[Guest]: is something that you pay.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking of MTV, I actually worked there for a bit in the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and the first video ever was Video Killed the Radio Star.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe a more appropriate anthem would be Influencer Killed the Musician Star, which
[Amit Varma]: might be kind of coming upon us.
[Amit Varma]: My other question is that I agree with you when you say that in every generation, there'll
[Amit Varma]: be kids who will want to go outside the beaten track in terms of whatever the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: stuff is and discover their own music and their taste will take them wherever they do.
[Amit Varma]: But could it also be said that the notion of a mainstream has changed, if not dissolved?
[Amit Varma]: Like Steve Van Zandt of the E Street Band, in an interview, he spoke about how rock was
[Amit Varma]: mainstream for like, 30 years, from the Beatles or Ellen going electric to maybe Nirvana.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, everything kind of just splintered and there is no longer one mainstream and
[Amit Varma]: that is a trend I see happening across everything else, not just music, like in terms of media,
[Amit Varma]: you had a consensus on the truth, you had these mainstream outlets.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's completely dispersed, you know, people get their sort of narratives from all
[Amit Varma]: over the place, there is no more a consensus and truth.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you know, just in terms of entertainment, would it be the case that tastes are much
[Amit Varma]: more dispersed and fragmented, which of course, would have the negative impact that musicians,
[Amit Varma]: it becomes harder to make money.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you could say that it becomes easier to make money in a way because
[Amit Varma]: a long tail is enabled, because many more people can form what Kevin Kelly called, you
[Amit Varma]: know, thousand true fans, and you can reach out to them.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, these sort of conflicting thoughts kind of come to me.
[Guest]: So what's, what's your sense of it?
[Guest]: You ever noticed like, when we were kids, and there were only two channels, there's
[Guest]: a bigger chance that everyone watched the same thing.
[Guest]: Then when Star TV came, and, you know, then someone was watching this some, you know,
[Guest]: that splintering has kept going on with technology as we get to the point.
[Guest]: It also depends upon how easily influenced you are by your peer group as well.
[Guest]: You know, suddenly someone, I remember one friend, hey, look at this band from the States
[Guest]: Nirvana.
[Guest]: Like, you know, suddenly everyone got into that.
[Guest]: And that's how it kind of spread in that sense.
[Guest]: So I mean, we're still social in that way, we're not kind of isolated from each other.
[Guest]: So there's a chance of, you know, at least that kind of spread among, you know, like
[Guest]: a social group, for example, with regards to reaching an audience.
[Guest]: I don't know, man, because the thing is, right now, everything is up in the air, first of
[Guest]: all, because you're not competing for, you're competing for attention spans, basically,
[Guest]: with everything else that's out there.
[Guest]: Not just music.
[Guest]: You're competing with video games, with, you know, sport, with everything else.
[Guest]: Because the thing is around whatever you're interested in, you can just go and find so
[Guest]: much content, there's no way you're going to get through it all.
[Guest]: You know, if I suddenly get into Stratocaster Bridges, for example, I can find like a year's
[Guest]: worth of content to watch.
[Guest]: Now, I'm not that interested in it, I'm like somewhat interested, I'm just saying the fact
[Guest]: that there's one year of content to watch about Stratocaster Bridges, whereas if I had
[Guest]: to see a guitar on TV, I would feel happy.
[Guest]: So I don't know, man, I think we just live in a strange world.
[Guest]: It's kind of hard to predict and say, you know, this is what's going to happen.
[Guest]: First of all, you don't even know the whole metaverse thing, how it's going to, you know,
[Guest]: play out.
[Guest]: For me personally, it scares the hell out of me.
[Guest]: But then I feel like an old person who, when the internet came, like, what is this internet?
[Guest]: So I mean, you kind of need to adapt and just keep an open mind.
[Guest]: But obviously, if there's things that show that they're going to be harmful to us as
[Guest]: a society, and as a planet or whatever, you know, it's a famous video of Bill Gates and
[Amit Varma]: David Letterman, I think circa 96 or something and Letterman's making fun of him saying what
[Amit Varma]: is this internet thing and all of that and Bill Gates is like, you can get sports update
[Amit Varma]: and David Letterman is like, but I can turn on the radio for that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so I really hesitate to be negative about say, web three or, you know, any of
[Amit Varma]: these newfangled things I don't understand, because my assumption is maybe there's something
[Amit Varma]: I don't get maybe we are the uncles, but just sort of going back to just following up on,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what you just said, that, you know, when the three of us mentioned the Beatles,
[Amit Varma]: it is immediately understood that we all know the Beatles that there is a common place in
[Amit Varma]: our consciousness that the Beatles holds that in a sense, you know, Ted Joyer used a lovely
[Amit Varma]: phrase where he said that music is like a kind of cloud memory that sort of connects
[Amit Varma]: people in this manner.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the thing that I wonder if the next generation will not have that one person's
[Amit Varma]: Beatles won't be the other person's Beatles, because they've just gone on such incredibly
[Amit Varma]: different tracks.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, when when I get into YouTube rabbit holes, you know, I have a regular account.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, I said that, okay, just to understand it a little better, I need to
[Amit Varma]: understand what the Hindutva right wing rabbit holes are like those extreme guys.
[Amit Varma]: But I didn't want it to mess up my algorithm.
[Amit Varma]: So I incognito window, a different Google account.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is that now, those are two completely different YouTubes, those two different YouTubes
[Amit Varma]: that I see on my regular account, and my incognito account have no relation to each other.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's analogous of the experience that different young people have today, where
[Amit Varma]: they're not actually watching a common stream, where there is no Beatles as such.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I remember Jonathan Haidt once said that you might think that kids today would
[Amit Varma]: understand the past much better, because everything all of history, it's available to them.
[Amit Varma]: But his point was that everybody is watching content that was created in the last three
[Amit Varma]: days, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So we are constantly sort of in this chakra view, as it were, where content keeps coming,
[Amit Varma]: we keep watching, but there's no space for sitting back and reflection.
[Amit Varma]: Those common connections aren't there.
[Amit Varma]: So a bit of a ramble, but any thoughts?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, it, I mean, we should be actually listening to what these right wing people
[Guest]: are on about just so we understand that they're not crazy.
[Guest]: There's obviously something that's, that's going on in their heads.
[Guest]: And the only way to reach some kind of a conciliation, because at the end, we're all humans, we have
[Guest]: to share the same planet, there's no point, like, spewing hate, whichever side of the
[Guest]: battle or whatever you're on, the very fact that there's become such a, you know, a huge
[Guest]: divide between us as a society is like, really alarming, you know, everywhere you go, every
[Guest]: country, you kind of find like that kind of conflict.
[Guest]: And if these algorithms are only fueling that further, because no one is getting to see
[Guest]: the other point of view, that whole us and them happens, you know, you, you guys suck,
[Guest]: you guys suck.
[Guest]: I mean, like, both sides have got some, you know, bad things about it, that you can take
[Guest]: each side too far.
[Guest]: If you can go like, there are crazy people in the left wing as well, you know, so I guess
[Guest]: at the point where we can somewhat understand what each other has to say, okay, I get like,
[Guest]: you don't like what this does or whatever, but at least let's, you know, eat what we
[Guest]: want to eat, wear what we want to wear, do what we, without harming, basically, the,
[Guest]: every religion should just scrap all their books and put one rule, don't be an asshole.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: For now, I think this is the only message the world needs, don't be an asshole.
[Guest]: You know, in our own lives, we find the times where we are an asshole.
[Guest]: So like, let's not be assholes for a little while, till things get a bit better.
[Amit Varma]: You could form a new religion around that.
[Unknown]: Yeah, man, just don't be an asshole.
[Unknown]: That's it.
[Unknown]: There were two trains of thought running in my head.
[Unknown]: One, you said that most of the content that we consume right now happened in the last
[Unknown]: three days.
[Unknown]: And there's another article related to music that both of us read, which is new music is,
[Unknown]: old music is killing new music.
[Unknown]: And Warren, I'm guessing you saw that as well, because Rick Beato did a video on that too.
[Unknown]: And one of the astonishing facts over there was increasingly people are listening to older
[Unknown]: music.
[Unknown]: And I have struggled to reconcile my head around these two facts at the same time.
[Unknown]: Maybe there is no answer over here, but I just wanted to know what you thought about
[Unknown]: that.
[Unknown]: Because people are listening to older music.
[Unknown]: Another video that Rick Beato had done was actually he had compared the following that
[Unknown]: new artists had along with older artists.
[Unknown]: And it was quite surprising because some of the legacy artists like Queen, for instance,
[Unknown]: had a lot of subscribers and were very relevant to even his son's generation, for example.
[Unknown]: Just wanted to know what you thought about that, that on one hand, you have, okay, there's
[Unknown]: so much content being created, and we're consuming everything that's being created, a lot of
[Unknown]: the stuff that we're consuming happened in the last three days.
[Unknown]: And at the same time, a lot of the legacy content is also being consumed, be it books,
[Unknown]: be it music, be it films even.
[Unknown]: So yeah, I just wanted to get your take on that.
[Guest]: Basically, the algorithms work like this, things become more popular, as they become
[Guest]: more popular.
[Guest]: You know what I mean?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's how it works.
[Guest]: So now the Queen thing, for example, I traced it to that movie, which was hugely popular.
[Guest]: You know, that kind of drove a huge spike in listeners.
[Guest]: And then because of that, more people got to listen to it.
[Guest]: So the more people listen to it, the more people get to listen to it.
[Guest]: You know what I mean?
[Guest]: That's just how it works.
[Guest]: With the Beatles now, this get back thing just came out.
[Guest]: So again, I'm just looking at musicians my age as well, more people are talking about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So it was kind of like, yeah, everyone knows what the Beatles is, right, and how this like
[Guest]: kids also are, you know, being, you know, faced with that, you know, this is what's
[Guest]: coming out.
[Guest]: And it becomes popular.
[Guest]: So people talk about it.
[Guest]: So you want to go in and check it out.
[Unknown]: Yeah, that's interesting.
[Unknown]: This is kind of like stuff from the past is being repurposed in various ways.
[Unknown]: And then that drives spikes.
[Unknown]: There's this interesting thing that happened a couple of years back, the TikTok Fleetwood
[Unknown]: Mac thing.
[Unknown]: I don't know if you guys remember this.
[Guest]: So the guy drinking that, yeah, on the skateboard.
[Unknown]: Yeah, so for those who don't know what this is about, especially since we can't see TikTok
[Unknown]: here in India, there was a video of a guy, it wasn't a content creator and influencer
[Unknown]: or anything like that.
[Unknown]: He was drinking a juice called Ocean Spray.
[Unknown]: And he was skateboarding down his road.
[Unknown]: And he was humming along to Dreams, I think it was by Fleetwood Mac, and he was just humming
[Unknown]: it out.
[Unknown]: And for no reason at all that managed to go viral, it became a meme of his own, Mick Fleetwood.
[Unknown]: And I think Stevie Nicks also did their own versions of this.
[Unknown]: And this led to Ocean Spray.
[Unknown]: It was not a branded campaign by them or anything, but it ended up becoming a huge thing for
[Unknown]: the brand.
[Unknown]: And the song entered the Billboard Top 100 after what 30-40 years.
[Unknown]: I guess that's an example of what you're talking about.
[Unknown]: It is some random accident somewhere or a planned cultural event like a Queen movie
[Unknown]: or a Beatles documentary that brings a lot of these old things back and makes them relevant
[Unknown]: again for a younger audience as well as oldies like us who just want to relive some of that.
[Unknown]: So I guess there's something over there.
[Guest]: Yeah, because I guess when I was a kid, I was listening to the Beatles while the other
[Guest]: kids in my class were listening to Guns N' Roses.
[Guest]: Because I remember one girl telling me, why are you listening to this old fashioned music?
[Guest]: I said, like, you know, this is like, what I want to listen to.
[Guest]: And then I learned sweet child of mine on the guitar just to like, you know, shut her
[Unknown]: up.
[Unknown]: You remind me of that TikToker who had again, it goes back to TikTok again, you remember
[Unknown]: that Metallica girl from last year?
[Unknown]: She is an R&B singer and hip hopper or something and she was wearing a Metallica t-shirt and
[Unknown]: metal fans being metal fans, like a hip hop person wearing a Metallica thing, bet you
[Unknown]: don't even know three Metallica songs.
[Unknown]: And she went on her next video and said, I can, instead of naming them, I'd rather just
[Unknown]: play them for you on the guitar.
[Unknown]: And she shredded her way through Master of Puppets, the solo of one and a couple of others
[Unknown]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was speaking of that phenomenon, I mean, and even before this, I remember a few
[Amit Varma]: years back, forget TikTok, there was a TV commercial, I think a Volkswagen with Nick
[Amit Varma]: Drake's Pink Moon.
[Amit Varma]: And Nick Drake suddenly became a big for a short while again, which is great, because
[Amit Varma]: I love the guy though, that's not perhaps his favorite song of mine.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, what you said about what is popular, you know, lead that that sort of
[Amit Varma]: vicious circle that starts reminds me of this experiment.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if I'll be able to, if I remember the details well enough, but the whole idea
[Amit Varma]: of the experiment was that these guys gave an app with a few 1000 songs to a couple of
[Amit Varma]: 100 kids, but they programmed those apps.
[Amit Varma]: So it would randomly show which you know, which were the 10 most played ones and which
[Amit Varma]: were the most popular.
[Amit Varma]: So all of them had different top 10 lists in their apps, you know, like not 300 different,
[Amit Varma]: but maybe 30 different 10 people each.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, that's exactly what happened, what Warren said, the stuff that was already
[Amit Varma]: on the charts got listened to more.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it kind of spiraled.
[Amit Varma]: And you had completely separate trajectories for the music in, you know, for each of the
[Amit Varma]: control groups, which is kind of fascinating, because that also sort of short tells you
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about just the role of sheer dumb luck, that if you kind of happen to somehow
[Amit Varma]: make it, then you continue making it like that whole Billy Joel story about how Piano
[Amit Varma]: Man came out, and then it was going nowhere.
[Amit Varma]: And his label was just, you know, had given up on him and, you know, and then this one
[Amit Varma]: guy who was passionate about it started taking it around to all the radio stations, and somebody
[Amit Varma]: gave it a play.
[Amit Varma]: And after it was dead, it is revived, and Billy Joel becomes Billy Joel.
[Unknown]: But yeah, but arguably, luck has played a role throughout history right now, our context
[Unknown]: for that is Spotify algorithms.
[Unknown]: Back in the day, it might have been something else.
[Unknown]: What if George had sorry, what if Paul had never met john for whatever reason that day?
[Unknown]: So yeah, I guess we can all these are what ifs experiments except now instead of meeting
[Unknown]: in a place now it's, did you discover this on tik tok or something like that?
[Guest]: I've got a killer idea for a movie, by the way.
[Guest]: So there's this band from the 70s, like relatively popular band from the 70s.
[Guest]: And they're in their tour bus and the tour bus hit some kind of weird wormhole and they
[Guest]: get transported to, you know, I don't know what COVID times were at least present day.
[Guest]: And they have to suddenly deal with this thing called social media.
[Guest]: And and also streaming services and everything, everything is like totally different.
[Guest]: So like how they deal with that.
[Guest]: And my idea was for these like macho metal guys to meet a band of young girls who then
[Guest]: shows them how to do this.
[Unknown]: Yeah, actually, that actually sounds pretty interesting.
[Unknown]: And that was another thing that Amit and I actually discovered, he asked me a very fascinating
[Unknown]: question.
[Unknown]: And I'd love to know what your take on this would be.
[Unknown]: Suppose Watters and Gilmore actually form Pink Floyd today.
[Unknown]: How would things be different?
[Guest]: Man, there's no Rick, right?
[Guest]: I was like the secret weapon, anyway, yeah, being a purist aside.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I think they'd still be able to make good music.
[Guest]: I wouldn't put it past them.
[Guest]: You know, it just depends on what time and place they are.
[Guest]: Because musicians are always, you know, always changing, like there's not there's not one
[Guest]: particular mindset, there's always 150 things we could be doing, it just depends what appeals
[Guest]: at that particular time, suddenly, the wind changes, and they decide, okay, it's a good
[Guest]: idea to work together, then you've got it.
[Guest]: And if not, then not.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think I think our speculation really was that, because like, if they were young
[Amit Varma]: today and growing up today, they the palette of music they would listen to would be completely
[Amit Varma]: different.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, who knows what direction they would go in.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you know, to return to the subject of your sort of evolving years, there is also
[Amit Varma]: the counterfactual that if you weren't born in the family you were born in, where your
[Amit Varma]: father is a bass guitarist, and your uncle is a lawyer and all of that, that if you weren't
[Amit Varma]: exposed to that kind of music, if you were, you know, in a South Indian family, listening
[Amit Varma]: to Carnatic, or if you were, you know, somewhere else listening only to Bollywood in a village
[Amit Varma]: in Bihar, totally different directions, different counterfactuals.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about, you know, then how you got sort of turned on to playing
[Amit Varma]: music, what your other early influences were like, I remember you talking about how your
[Amit Varma]: dad when he first showed you chords on the guitar, he showed you A minor and E, which
[Amit Varma]: aren't really the typical sort of standard ones.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, that phase of your life where you're into music,
[Amit Varma]: you're discovering music, you know, beyond the Beatles, you know, who else were the people
[Amit Varma]: you kind of fell in love with, and how did that sort of start evolving from this?
[Guest]: So let's get to when the Beatles, rather the only Beatles phase was ending.
[Guest]: So that was around 13.
[Guest]: Now, the hormones have started to kick in.
[Guest]: And by this time, I kind of started catching up with what the rest of the, you know, peer
[Guest]: group was listening to.
[Guest]: So I think Guns N' Roses had done Live and Let Die.
[Guest]: So I say, oh, they've covered Paul McCartney, they can't be that bad.
[Guest]: Let me check it out.
[Guest]: So I got that Illusion One album.
[Guest]: That was the first one I actually listened to, in entirety, I'd listened to a couple
[Guest]: of songs from Appetite, but this was like the first album listen.
[Guest]: So I found it really enjoyable, November in came very lovely melodies, great guitar solos,
[Guest]: I was like, yeah, this is some cool stuff.
[Guest]: And then we had started seeing their videos also on Star TV around the same time.
[Guest]: So it kind of, you know, everyone's Oh, Guns N' Roses, Guns N' Roses became a thing.
[Guest]: So that was around 13.
[Guest]: Then for some reason, I got a Kira and I started tracing back further, like, where are these
[Guest]: guys coming from?
[Guest]: And I got into Aerosmith.
[Guest]: And then Led Zeppelin hit in a huge way, I think that was around, say, 15 or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: I got that Led Zeppelin 4 album.
[Guest]: And then the next thing you know, I'm on one huge rabbit hole, as you tend to and then
[Guest]: all my lunch money is going into buying cassettes, you know, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: And during this time, the guitar became more of a social connection as well, because I
[Guest]: had a friend, Johan, who I've known since I was a child, because our dads knew each
[Guest]: other.
[Guest]: Dads were musicians, but both were bass players, so they never played in the same band.
[Guest]: So luckily for us, Johan played bass and I played guitar.
[Guest]: In fact, actually, I started on bass when I was a kid.
[Guest]: But my dad said, listen, you're probably going to get a lot better at music.
[Guest]: If you learn to play guitar, it's more like harmony and everything, more open.
[Guest]: You can still play bass, but you know, don't forget to play guitar as well.
[Guest]: So luckily around that time, I was playing guitar, he was playing bass, we started jamming
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: And I used to go to his house, you know, we had just gotten out of school.
[Guest]: He's one year older than me, both of us in the same school.
[Guest]: So we had gotten out of school and I used to go to his house to jam.
[Guest]: He used to have this little drum machine that his dad had given him.
[Guest]: So he used to program a beat on that.
[Guest]: And he would play and both of us around the same time started listening to a lot of music
[Guest]: together, like cream and a lot of classic rock.
[Guest]: You know, we had this one MCA Records compilation.
[Guest]: So there was Lynyrd Skynyrd, Freebird, and a whole bunch of songs like Born to be Wild
[Guest]: and all that kind of thing.
[Guest]: I still remember to this day.
[Guest]: So we started listening to music together, started trading cassettes and that kind of
[Guest]: stuff.
[Guest]: I remember one day we were sitting and jamming and he was playing bass along with the drum
[Guest]: machine and I was playing guitar.
[Guest]: I was so like absorbed in what I was playing.
[Guest]: I woke up and I was like, I opened my eyes and I went to talk to him and he had left
[Guest]: the room.
[Guest]: He had programmed the bass line as well in that machine and he had left.
[Guest]: I was in an empty room with the guitar.
[Guest]: So we had a lot of these like nice formative, you know, like just playing with other musicians
[Guest]: that became a big thing.
[Guest]: And then he had these next door neighbors, Rajiv and Bobby, who then I later on got into
[Guest]: a band with them.
[Guest]: But they had a kind of a jam thing where it wasn't really like a band where we went and
[Guest]: played gigs and stuff.
[Guest]: We just get together and play music.
[Guest]: So this kind of went along for like around a year.
[Guest]: And then Sid Cooter, who was another childhood friend, but he had never lived in Bombay.
[Guest]: His dad was always, you know, traveling outside the city.
[Guest]: He came back to Bombay after like many years.
[Guest]: So my mom kind of, you know, made sure because he lived down the road, you know, go be friends,
[Guest]: you know how moms are.
[Guest]: I remember when she said, you can't go jam unless you take him with you as well.
[Guest]: So I had to go and call him and he came with his bright green guitar and everything.
[Guest]: And he was louder than everyone else.
[Guest]: I remember that.
[Guest]: So then that kind of became a thing.
[Guest]: And then Sid, Johan and me got into a band together called Vicious Circle.
[Guest]: And the whole deal with the band was we couldn't play anything after 1980.
[Guest]: That was a cut off.
[Guest]: So anything after 1980 was not on the set list.
[Guest]: So it kind of gave us some kind of a direction, you know.
[Guest]: So we played everything from Deep Purple, Zep, the usual classic rock stuff.
[Guest]: And the whole thing was Sid was playing drums and singing.
[Guest]: So we played our first gig and he was behind the drums.
[Guest]: And everyone said, you guys are lip syncing, there's no singer.
[Guest]: So he got really bugged about that.
[Guest]: He said, I'm never going to be, you know, doing this behind the drums singing again.
[Guest]: We need to get a single.
[Guest]: So he got a single.
[Guest]: This guy called Sean Gomes.
[Guest]: And he was a big Dire Straits and U2 fan.
[Guest]: So some of that stuff also was incorporated into U2 kind of just about got in because
[Guest]: like there was like one or two songs that were before 1980.
[Guest]: So or, you know, 1980 itself.
[Guest]: So that became like, like the first proper band where we actually got together and started
[Guest]: practicing and all that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: And we actually got pretty tight.
[Guest]: I remember we used to play Stormbringer and at the end of it, like, we used to look at
[Guest]: each other like, wow, did we actually pull that off?
[Guest]: And you know, it was like, not bad at all.
[Guest]: We did our first gig at Razz and I remember the first time Sid told me, let's play a gig
[Guest]: at Razz.
[Guest]: I was like, what?
[Guest]: Are you kidding?
[Guest]: We'll never get to play there.
[Guest]: So I was a very realistic guy, like, you know, there's no way I'm going to get to a point
[Guest]: where we're playing at, you know, a proper place where people pay money to come and watch
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: So that happened.
[Guest]: And just after that, that became like, you know, something that we worked and worked
[Guest]: towards.
[Guest]: And we did pretty well at that gig, all our friends came and watched everyone had a good
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: We actually made a little bit of money or whatever, which we spent on food.
[Guest]: So just after that gig, Johan left to study in the States.
[Guest]: So now like back to square one, Sid and me were like, what do we do?
[Guest]: So he had the right idea.
[Guest]: The next door neighbors, they have a drum kit, let's call them.
[Guest]: So that became, you know, what became Zero.
[Guest]: And during this time in between, you know, the two bands, Sid and I started writing music
[Guest]: together and we found it quite effortless.
[Guest]: Like I would come up with a chord progression, he would sing something on top of it.
[Guest]: Hey, we've got a song, you know, and we weren't really precious about it.
[Guest]: That's the thing, when you're that age, you don't think too much about it, just do it.
[Guest]: You know, you worry about, you worry later about what's going to happen with this song
[Guest]: and everything like that.
[Guest]: So I think we had written Not My Kind of Girl, a song called Dear Jesus, which not too many
[Guest]: people have heard.
[Guest]: And a couple of other songs like that, and they were mainly like, you know, chill out
[Guest]: music.
[Guest]: No, it wasn't like, you know, loud, heavy rock and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So when we finally got together as Zero, we tried playing covers, we sucked.
[Guest]: And then it was like, if we play our own songs, nobody knows how these songs are supposed
[Guest]: to go.
[Guest]: So we can kind of get away with it.
[Guest]: That was the whole, you know, idea.
[Guest]: It was a spite from the judging eyes of people who are well versed in the cover music.
[Guest]: And at that time, I think there was like a slight trend because you had bands like Indiscreet
[Guest]: and Pentagram, who are starting to, you know, play significantly their own music as opposed
[Guest]: to the usual thing is like you play 10 songs and then just at the end, hey, this is one
[Guest]: of ours, slip it in, that kind of a thing.
[Guest]: So suddenly it was like, you know, and it took a while for the audiences also to, you
[Guest]: know, to accept that.
[Guest]: Otherwise, first, they would give you a lot of shit initially, like, why aren't you playing
[Guest]: the music that we want to hear, you know, it's like, give it a chance.
[Guest]: And the good thing, I guess, is our songs had very identifiable choruses.
[Guest]: Because I think I said this before, if we didn't remember it, then the song was gone.
[Guest]: So we had to kind of design it in a way so we could remember it.
[Guest]: So then because of that, other people found it easy to remember as well.
[Guest]: So that kind of, you know, opened up a few doors.
[Guest]: And then, I guess, from that, around that time is when Chuck probably started listening
[Guest]: to Zero, he can fill you in on the rest.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a question about the learning process.
[Amit Varma]: Like, one of the questions like I teach a writing course online, and one of the issues
[Amit Varma]: that some of my students will sometimes have is that, listen, I've written something, but
[Amit Varma]: it sucks.
[Amit Varma]: What do I do?
[Amit Varma]: Now, part of the time, they are, of course, being too self critical and overthinking it.
[Amit Varma]: But part of the time, they're right, it sucks.
[Amit Varma]: And the way I look at it is that that is not a reason to stop.
[Amit Varma]: That is a reason to continue, because you only become better through endless iteration.
[Amit Varma]: And all it means when you've done something and you think it sucks, is that your judgment
[Amit Varma]: is better than your ability right now.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a good thing your judgment is good.
[Amit Varma]: But if you just continue working at it, your ability will catch up with your judgment sooner
[Guest]: or later, it's just a question of putting in the work.
[Guest]: Unless your judgment keeps getting better.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, it's a lifelong catching up process, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: But so when you're learning, you know, you've got all these influences, I'm guessing from
[Amit Varma]: all over the place.
[Amit Varma]: You also mentioned how you were turned on to the Allman Brothers and to the 70s bands
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So when you're learning, you've got all these heroes, you want to play like this.
[Amit Varma]: What was that process like, you know, in terms of what you're able to do and what you want
[Amit Varma]: to do, but you're unable to do right now, but you know, you want to do it.
[Amit Varma]: What was that learning process like?
[Amit Varma]: How do you keep doing it?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it just this youthful thing that you're just so enthusiastic, you just keep on going?
[Amit Varma]: Because in this, I think also there is sort of a lesson for younger people who I think
[Amit Varma]: sometimes can give up too soon.
[Amit Varma]: And that's dangerous.
[Guest]: I think you need to find one thing that you can kind of do well, that is going to serve
[Guest]: as an inspiration to keep continuing.
[Guest]: Like I was pretty good at, like, hearing inside my head, a melody, and then being able to
[Guest]: quickly find it on the fretboard.
[Guest]: I don't know, kind of, you know, it was a thing, I guess, a gift or whatever.
[Guest]: But I still had to work on it, you know, which is like today I made a lesson like 10 things
[Guest]: I wish I knew about playing guitar on YouTube.
[Guest]: One of the things I said is work on your strengths as well as your weaknesses.
[Guest]: Don't forget the strengths, because you have to keep honing that as well for it to get
[Guest]: better.
[Guest]: If it's something that you can do, just learn how to do it better.
[Guest]: And then automatically, which goes without saying, work on the stuff that you can't do
[Guest]: as well to get better on that.
[Guest]: But the things that you can do well, should, you know, kind of pull out the inspiration
[Guest]: into doing the things that you can't do well, at least that's my advice.
[Guest]: Because it's got to be some amount of natural, you know, not amount to say skill, but ability
[Guest]: that comes into play that serves as inspiration.
[Guest]: Otherwise, why would you want to do it, you know?
[Guest]: If you're going to cook and like you've been cooking for two years, and every meal is a
[Guest]: botched job, you don't want to actually, you know, cook anymore unless you are starving.
[Guest]: But if you like, say, after a few meals, it gets better, you know, like you notice a little
[Guest]: bit of improvement that becomes like an inspiration to say, hang on, I should just keep on doing
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And that's, at least for me, that's always what it's, you know, I just need to keep getting
[Guest]: better at whatever it is that I'm doing.
[Unknown]: A question that I'll ask over here is, when you shifted from doing covers to writing your
[Unknown]: own songs, how did that change your playing style?
[Unknown]: Was it around this time that you realized that you had the strength of being able to
[Unknown]: translate your own melodies that you had in your head onto guitar?
[Unknown]: So I was just curious to see how that how that transition from doing Deep Purple covers
[Unknown]: to writing Not My Kind of Girl, how that how that came about, how that affected your own
[Unknown]: playing style?
[Guest]: Well, at the time, we actually had to learn guitar, I mean, Deep Purple songs, I've already
[Guest]: kind of written Not My Kind of Girl.
[Guest]: So it wasn't really, you know, suddenly, it flipped over, there was always this parallel
[Guest]: thing happening, you were learning other people's music, as well as working on your own.
[Guest]: The good thing about your own music, like I said, there was no preconceived notion about
[Guest]: how something should be what, like something to live up to.
[Guest]: So whatever you did, at least as long as you put yourself into it, and you were able to
[Guest]: listen back to it without cringing.
[Guest]: That became like the goal, you know, I put, like, whatever I'm hearing into this.
[Guest]: So at least I feel honest doing it, you know, I'm not trying to be something that I'm not
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Guest]: On the other hand, it's still, you know, something that I've done, but I need to make sure it's
[Guest]: at a certain level, you know, just so I can, because now I can listen back to some stuff.
[Guest]: And some stuff is just like, no, let's, let's not listen to that anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Tell us about sort of the early days of Zero, like one of the things you mentioned is that
[Amit Varma]: you started as a five person act, you, I think, went to a mood indigo at IIT Povai and you
[Amit Varma]: completely bombed and the next time one of you didn't show up.
[Amit Varma]: And you realized that, hey, it's much tighter, everything is kind of falling into place.
[Amit Varma]: This is better.
[Amit Varma]: There was less to go wrong, less to go wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about your evolution as a band.
[Amit Varma]: And especially what I'm interested in is, who were the other local bands you looked
[Amit Varma]: at at that time as models?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, when you start off, you look at all the guys around you, which I guess
[Amit Varma]: in that era would be your Indus Creed, Parikrama, Pentagram, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, who are the guys you're looking at as possible models, you know, what is that
[Amit Varma]: journey like also towards finding your own sound like you were pretty much I think the
[Amit Varma]: first band that I can remember, which would only play originals, nothing else at all.
[Amit Varma]: So where did that kind of conviction come from?
[Guest]: I guess when we found people were able to recall the songs when they came back for the
[Guest]: next gig, sometimes they would start singing the choruses.
[Guest]: That was like, oh, you know, a nice little validation or whatever, whatever you're doing.
[Guest]: But I mean, bands like Pentagram was still starting to play their own stuff.
[Guest]: Because I've watched Pentagram go from like a large cover oriented set and very quickly
[Guest]: start throwing their own material in by the time that first album came out and stuff like
[Guest]: that from then onwards.
[Guest]: So that also was, you know, like a peer group thing, like, okay, it's fine to do that.
[Guest]: And even if you get gullies, let it be, they'll come back the next time.
[Guest]: And then it'll be a little bit better, you know, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: By the time we had played IIT Modindigo for the third time, I think this was the year
[Guest]: 2000.
[Guest]: That was the year we decided like, okay, let's not put one single cover on the setlist, it
[Guest]: has to be only our own music.
[Guest]: And you know, that was it as an identity, as this is who we are as a band that has to
[Guest]: be established.
[Guest]: And again, the added bonus is the judges wouldn't be able to know when you made a mistake.
[Guest]: As long as you were able to disguise that and not let it be a train wreck.
[Guest]: One little thing like if you miss the note, you know, that like, it will become less easy
[Guest]: for people to notice.
[Guest]: I remember the first time we played PSP was at that IIT Modindigo gig.
[Guest]: And Rajeev had just come back from the States.
[Guest]: And we had to teach him PSP in one evening.
[Guest]: And then when we're going on stage, the groove starts.
[Guest]: And then he comes running to me, how does the song start?
[Guest]: I don't know who asked him, he wrote that bit.
[Guest]: So he was running to Sid and said how, like, I knew the melody, I didn't know the lyrics.
[Guest]: So Sid knew the lyrics and he sang it to him in his ear.
[Guest]: And all this while, no one suspects a thing is up, it is just driving that groove through
[Guest]: and everything's like pretty tight at that point.
[Guest]: And then finally goes to the front of the stage and like he sings it like he owns it,
[Guest]: you know, at that point.
[Guest]: So at least there was by then that ability to kind of take these little, you know, pitfalls
[Guest]: or mishaps and not care about it still like, you know, we are the guys on this on the stage.
[Guest]: Yeah, so, so that particular gig went really well then because we won best band, best guitarist
[Guest]: and you know, all those prizes.
[Guest]: I remember like standing with my money in cash, it was 7,500 rupees, the most money
[Guest]: I'd ever seen from a gig.
[Guest]: And I gave all of it to my friend who had come back from the UK and bought me this thing
[Guest]: called the Ebo, which then went on to the studio recording of PSP.
[Guest]: But that Ebo was bought with my IIT Bodendigul winnings.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, kindly explain title of PSP 12 inches.
[Guest]: It's nothing really, it's just become a lot of a thing because the song became, you know,
[Guest]: relatively well known.
[Guest]: The whole idea was, I'll tell you how this song started.
[Guest]: So, I came into practice and this was for Strawberry Fields, NLS, Rajiv was in the States.
[Guest]: So we had Gareth from Split, another Bombay band, they, you know, sorry, he came for practice,
[Guest]: but he was late.
[Guest]: So when I walked in, Sid and Bobby had been waiting there for like a little while.
[Guest]: And they had started playing that and that grew.
[Guest]: And then I plugged in my guitar and then as is customary with bands, you start making
[Guest]: some noise along with what the other guys are playing.
[Guest]: And you know, it kind of after a while it fizzled out, but they had one nice chorus
[Guest]: just standing by, standing by, which they kept shouting.
[Guest]: I thought it was a little annoying at first, but then I kind of said, it's got a thing
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: So this was cool.
[Guest]: But then we didn't finish that song in time for NLS.
[Guest]: Then once Rajiv came back, this was like two months later, I think October to December.
[Guest]: Rajiv came back and then Mudai happened.
[Guest]: And then we needed one more song to flush out the setlist of only originals.
[Guest]: So then the idea was like, let's pull out that standing by song and finish it.
[Guest]: So we quickly finished it.
[Guest]: I went home, wrote that middle, that bridge part and everything, all the little ambient
[Guest]: section and everything.
[Guest]: The song was done, put it together, it was ready for Mudai, you know, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So the chorus was standing by, standing by, so then it became BSB.
[Guest]: And then they said, it sounds like a pizza, and then they changed it to PSP when I told
[Guest]: them that when I play the score, it's my pawn shakes, and then they became PSP pawn shaking
[Guest]: pawns instead of by standing by.
[Guest]: And then because it sounded like a pizza, that 12 inches at the end, like it's one of
[Guest]: those random events, which just became a thing, you know, I guess.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: And the song obviously took a life of its own after that.
[Unknown]: You know, what you're telling us about the Rajiv going around on stage asking people
[Unknown]: for the lyrics sort of thing.
[Unknown]: It's such a zero thing, because I remember, so one of the things I admired about the band
[Unknown]: in its later days, when you guys used to get together for those one off gigs, is that Rajiv
[Unknown]: would go off on one of his tangents talking about something random, and then the three
[Unknown]: of you would be very bored and just look to pass the time.
[Unknown]: One of you would come up with something, either you would play a little riff or Sid would
[Unknown]: play a little groove.
[Unknown]: And then before you know it, Rajiv is still talking about some nonsense, you know, or
[Unknown]: whatever.
[Unknown]: And the three of you are back there playing something legit.
[Unknown]: And I'm being in the audience, I can say this, everybody around me is like, is this an actual
[Unknown]: song?
[Unknown]: Are they actually is this a lead up to an actual song performance?
[Unknown]: And then you will smile or something.
[Unknown]: And you'll say, Okay, enough of this nonsense, and let's get to actually playing something.
[Unknown]: And everybody's like, why did you do that?
[Unknown]: Why do that KLPD?
[Unknown]: Like, that sounded great.
[Unknown]: Why did you stop?
[Unknown]: Why did you not continue this?
[Unknown]: So yeah, so the reason I said that, so that is from 2000.
[Unknown]: From that random incident to 2015 or 16, when the last time you guys played was, I guess
[Unknown]: that tightness and band chemistry really didn't change all that much, did it?
[Guest]: No, it never really does.
[Guest]: Because even when we last played at NH7, I remember flying in from Singapore, and you
[Guest]: know, it was a series of connecting flights.
[Guest]: And I finally got there five minutes before we were due to start the gig.
[Guest]: And they had soundchecked without me.
[Guest]: So I came in, just dumped my thing plugged in, and one, two, three, gajang, literally,
[Guest]: that was like it what it was like it may have been, I may have had a second to just go and
[Guest]: wipe my face, you know, all the sweat and start playing.
[Guest]: But that's what it felt like.
[Guest]: And it never really, you know, felt weird or anything like that.
[Guest]: It's just like, you get back into it quickly, as long as the other other guys know the song
[Guest]: goes.
[Guest]: Yeah, we're good to go.
[Guest]: So certain things get written into your read only memory never to be erased.
[Guest]: I think like, you can wake me up in the morning, go to guitar and start playing Lucy, you know,
[Guest]: we can just start the gig in in autopilot.
[Guest]: And somewhere in the middle of the gig, you kind of take stock of you know, what's what's
[Guest]: going on in that sense.
[Guest]: So that's a pretty cool thing.
[Guest]: You can just get back with these guys and just plug in and make music.
[Amit Varma]: And back in those days, when Zero was taking off, and you know, then Hook comes out, which
[Amit Varma]: was the second album, and you've become really popular on the local scene.
[Amit Varma]: What was your conception of where this band is going?
[Amit Varma]: Initially, you're a bunch of guys who just enjoy jamming together.
[Amit Varma]: You kind of do that.
[Amit Varma]: You say, let's make a band, you go you form a band, then you write these originals, you
[Amit Varma]: do one album, you do a second album.
[Amit Varma]: Was there, you know, in your young minds thought that, hey, we should we want to break through
[Amit Varma]: internationally?
[Amit Varma]: Or was there in your mind that gradual acceptance that hey, no, this is kind of the limit of
[Amit Varma]: what the scene is?
[Amit Varma]: Just take me through that journey of thinking about what is this band's place in the world?
[Guest]: What's happening?
[Guest]: I mean, for us, it like the whole thing was we had certain goals.
[Guest]: Like the first goal was play Mood Indigo.
[Guest]: We played Mood Indigo.
[Guest]: Then we wanted to play Rang Bhavan and we played Rang Bhavan.
[Guest]: Then we wanted to win Mood Indigo, then we won Mood Indigo, then we won Great Indian
[Guest]: Rock.
[Guest]: And after that, we said, you know, I think we've like done a fair amount on this competition
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: So we decided not to like take part in any of these.
[Guest]: So we became one of those, you know, pro bands at the college, you know, they would call
[Guest]: us to play and that sort of thing.
[Guest]: And after a while, I realized that this is kind of as high as you can get in this particular,
[Guest]: you know, pecking order.
[Guest]: And in order for us to break abroad at that point, first of all, we don't have the money
[Guest]: or financial backing to actually support a tour at that time.
[Guest]: It was like frightfully expensive, which it probably still is in that sense.
[Guest]: But we've won a few competitions and then, you know, there was this thing about sending
[Guest]: us overseas to some country and everything.
[Guest]: But then there was always this thing that was communicated to us that you need to have
[Guest]: the Indian element.
[Guest]: So we had made many jokes about this whole Indian element.
[Guest]: What is the Indian element?
[Guest]: Like we are zeros.
[Guest]: Zero is an Indian invention.
[Guest]: So you know, that's the Indian element.
[Guest]: Is that enough for you?
[Guest]: What do you want?
[Guest]: Do you want us to wear lungis?
[Guest]: What do you want us to do?
[Guest]: So, you know, and at that time, I think also slowly, maybe after that time came the acceptance
[Guest]: that you can still show your Indianness in your music and still be authentic.
[Guest]: You won't like consider selling out just because you put some tabla on your music.
[Guest]: And the whole thing is to get it to fuse effortlessly.
[Guest]: If it does, great.
[Guest]: And if it doesn't, in a band like Zero, it never seemed like, you know, it was it was
[Guest]: needed.
[Guest]: We just play what we want to play.
[Guest]: And the fact that we lived in India was Indian enough for us, you know, we didn't found the
[Guest]: need to add.
[Guest]: And then as you grow older, obviously, with Blackstar Blues, those influences start creeping
[Guest]: in your sitar, the Tanpura drone in the Renaissance Mission and stuff like that.
[Guest]: It goes together, you know, pretty well in that sense.
[Guest]: So there was also a little bit of that sense like, OK, I think, you know, it's kind of
[Guest]: got to as good as it's going to get.
[Guest]: And at that time, my parents had moved to New Zealand around 2003.
[Guest]: And there was this, you know, are you going to come, are you going to stay there?
[Guest]: That you know, parents, they wanted me to obviously move along with them as well.
[Guest]: So for around one or two years after they left, it was like a huge party scene.
[Guest]: But then I also started kind of, you know, feeling the wind down, like, there has to
[Guest]: be more to life than this.
[Guest]: So then for me, it was like, OK, let's go there and see what that's all about.
[Guest]: And then I went and I actually found a system that somewhat works, everything was like a
[Guest]: polar opposite of what you're used to in India.
[Guest]: India is like too many people there, there's not enough people, you know, there's very
[Guest]: long lines, you know, there's not very long lines.
[Guest]: So that's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: I mean, you start noticing the contrast and everything like that.
[Guest]: So then it became like, OK, maybe I should stay here for a while.
[Guest]: And after a series of very, shall we say, fortunate events, I ended up getting my New
[Guest]: Zealand residency because the thing was, I had to reach out before I was 25.
[Guest]: And I landed here on my 25th birthday, cutting it close.
[Guest]: So anyway, finally, I got it.
[Guest]: And that was a sign like after all this, you know, chakkar and everything, maybe I should
[Guest]: stay here for a little bit.
[Guest]: So I did a six month thing back in India where I packed up all my stuff because I'd come
[Guest]: in initially on a tourist visa, tourist visa, as you do, went back, packed up all my stuff.
[Guest]: And 2005 is when I was like, chalo, I'm going there.
[Guest]: You guys won't see me for a very long time.
[Guest]: So it wasn't such like a, what do you call it, like a whole drama thing, like, you know,
[Guest]: I'm going, I'm leaving the band and all that kind of thing was like, no, listen, I've got
[Guest]: to go and live in another country for a while.
[Guest]: So, you know, you guys carry on and we'll see, you know, where things go.
[Guest]: And I think I came back for a holiday in 2006.
[Guest]: We played at one of the great Indian rock set, Pragati Maidana is one of the headlining
[Guest]: bands and everything like that.
[Guest]: So that was cool as and when, you know, there was no thing like, okay, now it's ended and
[Guest]: now we're reuniting or anything.
[Guest]: It's just like, no, we're in the same city.
[Guest]: We play.
[Guest]: We're not in the same city.
[Guest]: We don't play.
[Guest]: It's as simple as that.
[Guest]: So that's kind of the whole thing with Zero, the way it currently is, at least now.
[Amit Varma]: And how are you kind of collaborating, you know, what you were doing as a musician?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, at one point you decided to be serious, you've spoken about how you
[Amit Varma]: were doing engineering, decided it wasn't for you, left that, you're a full time musician,
[Amit Varma]: your families were supportive of that and all of that, then Zero happens, presumably
[Amit Varma]: you've got some ambitions for that, but you do as well as you can as a band.
[Amit Varma]: And the next thing you're in New Zealand, there's a completely new ecosystem.
[Amit Varma]: You don't know anybody there, I'm guessing it's like, totally different.
[Amit Varma]: What are you thinking of in terms of, you know, the next 20-30 years of your life?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know no one really plans like that.
[Amit Varma]: But were there moments of worry?
[Amit Varma]: Were there moments where you wondered if you'd made the right decision in terms of going
[Amit Varma]: to New Zealand?
[Amit Varma]: Obviously not in terms of music, because, or did you have second thoughts about that
[Guest]: as well?
[Guest]: No, it was just like, I need to try something new.
[Guest]: You know, when you come to that point in your life, you know, like things are starting to
[Guest]: feel like samey and very old and, you know, stagnant in that sense.
[Guest]: So you have to kind of do something different to get to a different place in your life.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it felt like the right thing.
[Guest]: And, you know, like a young kid who's never really been outside India, suddenly everything
[Guest]: was like, you know, wide open, I was like, well, you can actually listen to the sound
[Guest]: of your guitar notes decaying into silence.
[Guest]: That was a new thing for me, I could hear the note decaying, right?
[Guest]: Because in India, obviously, where I live in Bombay, noisy part of the city, it decays
[Guest]: and then the autos take over.
[Guest]: So you know, all these little bits of discovery were pretty cool.
[Guest]: And my parents had this garage where my brother and me pooled our resources together and we
[Guest]: set up a little studio.
[Guest]: And I was putting down a few ideas and he said, you know, I've gotten pretty good at
[Guest]: programming drums, let me have a crack at it.
[Guest]: So then he turned out some spectacular drum tracks, I was like, hang on, this is a cool
[Guest]: opportunity for me to flush out all the unfinished ideas, because there were always these ideas
[Guest]: which were like, you know, in a half completed state throughout the zero thing.
[Guest]: Once in a while, the band guys would like get me to finish it like spittly for Christmas
[Guest]: in July and put it on an album.
[Guest]: But those were like the precursor Black Swan Blues tracks.
[Guest]: So then there were tracks like Anubha Sky and Soar the Sky and everything like that,
[Guest]: which were, you know, incomplete.
[Guest]: Because of this sudden, you know, josh, you get that, oh, suddenly it's sounding really
[Guest]: good with this guy programming the drums, it became really easy.
[Guest]: So then that flow got established.
[Guest]: So I think I recorded that entire album in three weeks.
[Guest]: It sounds nuts right now, at my current state of, you know, work.
[Guest]: But in three weeks, I kind of had it wrapped up.
[Guest]: But it was still so fresh that I didn't have the detachedness from it to mix it properly.
[Guest]: The mixes never sounded, you know, good.
[Guest]: So that process took me like a year and something to finish the mixes.
[Guest]: And then finally it was at a point, okay, I can put this out.
[Guest]: And then once it went out and people liked it, then it became, you know, by the time
[Guest]: the second album came around, enough people had liked it, where like Mithi by College
[Guest]: wanted to fly me down to play a gig that became the first Black Swan Blues gig in 2009.
[Guest]: So there was like a two year period of that, you know, just putting out stuff and seeing
[Guest]: what happens.
[Guest]: And then I think I put it out for free.
[Guest]: I had my website where it was a download link.
[Guest]: And then, you know, enough people heard it and they liked it and that's how things go.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm intrigued by one aspect of your development, you know, which has a sort of dual part to
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: One is that you said in an interview once that the first thing you noticed about Auckland
[Amit Varma]: was that it was a lot quieter than Mumbai and the silence opened up your ears in a new
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: You began to listen to music differently.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one thing.
[Amit Varma]: But the other thing is also I think something that inevitably happens with us as we grow
[Amit Varma]: older, where we kind of learn to take a step back and relax just a little bit and maybe
[Amit Varma]: get more comfortable in our skins and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Like you've done an interview with Chuck, I think around the time of the second Black
[Amit Varma]: Strat Blues album where he asked you what you don't do well.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you said that sometimes I still overplay, you know, and listening to your
[Amit Varma]: later albums and even those earlier albums, there's just a lot of restraint, a lot of
[Amit Varma]: chilling.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually, I guess, over time, you reach the stage where you become more and more comfortable
[Amit Varma]: in your own skin, where you're no longer worried about, you know, what you want to sound like.
[Amit Varma]: Am I living up to my own expectations?
[Amit Varma]: Or am I living up to the expectations of others?
[Amit Varma]: Or, you know, all of that and you and you just get comfortable and you just let the
[Amit Varma]: music kind of take over like, brief digression.
[Amit Varma]: I remember my friend Prem Panicker once was doing a writing workshop for my students and
[Amit Varma]: he told told me this great story about a writer and I forget which writer it was, but this
[Amit Varma]: writer was asked about his writing process.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, Okay, I get into the room, and I sit with my typewriter, and I close the
[Amit Varma]: door and then I'm alone in the room.
[Amit Varma]: So the whoever was interviewing the guy asked him that, is that when you start writing and
[Amit Varma]: he said no, because there are still even though I'm alone in the room, I can still sense all
[Amit Varma]: these other people around me whom I want to impress or their expectations of me and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: So I wait until they've all left.
[Amit Varma]: So then this person asked, Oh, so that's when you stop writing.
[Amit Varma]: And the guy said, No, that's not when I start writing, because there is still one person
[Amit Varma]: in the room.
[Amit Varma]: And that's me.
[Amit Varma]: And I wait for that person to leave.
[Amit Varma]: And then the story takes over.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it very resonant.
[Amit Varma]: Like when you somewhere else in another interview, you spoke about Ode to a Sunny Day and how
[Amit Varma]: that came about.
[Amit Varma]: And how at the end of it, you were kind of surprised at my God, I wrote this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: similar to when, you know, Paul McCartney got yesterday in a dream, and he woke up and
[Amit Varma]: he played it.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that, you know, have you heard this before?
[Amit Varma]: Because he couldn't believe he had written it, it kind of came.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this, that have you become comfortable in your own skin?
[Amit Varma]: What was that process like?
[Amit Varma]: You told Chuck in that interview more than a decade ago that you sometimes you overplayed,
[Amit Varma]: do you still do that?
[Amit Varma]: What was the journey like?
[Guest]: I mean, for me, the best music comes when when you become a conduit, or an antenna,
[Guest]: you're just able to channel something or a feeling or whatever just goes through you.
[Guest]: And as little of your own ego is applied to the process as possible.
[Guest]: There are certain things you obviously do well, and the certain things that you're kind
[Guest]: of more inclined to do than other things.
[Guest]: So that kind of shapes it.
[Guest]: But as long as I'm honest to the song, you know, and not trying to bend it against its
[Guest]: will, because you can do that to a piece of music, you can kind of push it too far into
[Guest]: something it's not intended to be.
[Guest]: So I guess I grew a little better at knowing when I was doing that, and then just back
[Guest]: off a little bit.
[Guest]: And the ability to take time and let something percolate in your subconscious for a while,
[Guest]: is pretty awesome.
[Guest]: Because now you're able to open a QA session, for example, and do a whole bunch of stuff
[Guest]: in one day, like say, do six hours of work.
[Guest]: And then you don't listen to it for like three weeks, and then you come back to it.
[Guest]: And then you have a little bit of a clear insight about that, take that out, that doesn't
[Guest]: work, you know, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: Because when you get into a flow, you tend to like, throw as much of it, you know, into
[Guest]: it as possible.
[Guest]: And then you come back another day, and then that second person has to strip away the excess
[Guest]: and kind of find what that little vein of gold inside the rock is.
[Guest]: And then shine that out a bit and tend to, you know, make that the centerpiece of it.
[Guest]: So it could be a melody, it could be a chord progression, it could be a drum groove, it
[Guest]: could be a bassline, whatever it is.
[Guest]: And then different types of songs, there's different things that can do that.
[Guest]: My main goal is to kind of keep myself interested in the process.
[Guest]: And to start the process, I try to find an idea which has what I call legs.
[Guest]: The idea is legs, it inspires me to do more to get it out.
[Guest]: And sometimes I can do too much, but I can always kind of come back to it, as long as
[Guest]: you know, things are not, you know, set in stone.
[Guest]: The idea of collaboration also is pretty awesome with me, because the idea of handing something
[Guest]: over to something like, say, a drum groove, why the hell would I want to think of a drum
[Guest]: groove when I've got someone like Jay or Cole, who would, you know, and also now I have like,
[Guest]: say, the ability to say, okay, this song is better if Jay plays it, or this song is better
[Guest]: if Cole plays it, that sort of thing on this last current album, which I found awesome.
[Guest]: It was like, otherwise, what you tend to do is you tend to shape the songs into what the
[Guest]: band itself is, you know, it's like, you know, you've got a certain cast, and then this is
[Guest]: the kind of material that is, this is the kind of material which is going to be best
[Guest]: for them.
[Guest]: Like with Zero, I would write in a very different way to what I would do in Black Swan Blues,
[Guest]: just because the members were different.
[Guest]: So once you get used to delegating that and handing things over, while still retaining
[Guest]: the overall picture, the big picture of things, it's pretty awesome in that sense, because
[Guest]: then the whole idea is also just freeing yourself of all these hang ups, you know, what is this
[Guest]: one going to think?
[Guest]: What is that one going to think?
[Guest]: Right now, I'm at a point where as long as I play honestly, and I play in tune and in
[Guest]: time, as you would expect, the idea would get across, you know, so I don't really want
[Guest]: to fluff it up by putting too much into it, just to show what I can do.
[Guest]: At this point, it's like, people know what I can do.
[Guest]: So, you know, I'd rather do what's best for the song.
[Unknown]: It almost seems to me like there are two parts to you.
[Unknown]: And I'm not saying the pre-Zero, the essence Zero guitarist and the Black Swan Blues guitarist,
[Unknown]: but when you what you described right now was kind of fascinating.
[Unknown]: It's like, there's a creator and there's an editor almost, right?
[Unknown]: Like there's a creator part where you create and then you come back, look at it with fresh
[Unknown]: eyes.
[Unknown]: Do you have like a different process?
[Unknown]: Or like, what are the things that you do to get into the respective grooves are there,
[Unknown]: you know, is, or when do you know that you need to, how do you know when to step out
[Unknown]: of the creator mode and step into the editor mode, for example?
[Guest]: I mean, you can't really hand off on one to the other, because there's still a little
[Guest]: bit of that creator thing that has to inform the editor part as well.
[Guest]: Because sometimes you can again get too clever with the editing as well.
[Guest]: So sometimes, you know, don't polish that too much.
[Guest]: It's better left, you know, in a slightly raw state.
[Guest]: That's kind of what was giving the thing its charm.
[Guest]: So you have to be very sensitive to the aesthetic or the vibe or whatever you want to call it.
[Guest]: You know, there's obviously going to be a subjective thing, because I'll hear things
[Guest]: differently than, you know, a different person who's equally proficient.
[Guest]: It's not a question of proficiency, it's just a question of taste.
[Guest]: So very often, there's no right or wrong, there's just different things.
[Guest]: And at the end of the day, it comes down to what makes you happy at that point of time,
[Guest]: because what makes you happy yesterday may not be what makes you happy today.
[Guest]: Just also depends on how you're feeling, you know, what the humidity is like, what the
[Guest]: temperature is like, all that kind of changes the way you perceive a piece of music.
[Guest]: I think the passage of time kind of helps me, at least, if I'm able to have enough time.
[Guest]: Because when people ask me, when is the next album going to be out?
[Guest]: I said, when it's ready.
[Guest]: I don't know when it's going to be ready.
[Guest]: And there's no one putting a gun to my head saying it needs to be out once so and so date.
[Guest]: So then, you know, why have an imaginary gun, you know, just wait till it's done.
[Guest]: But then also, I guess, the deadline kind of helps with the procrastination.
[Guest]: So sometimes you have to set yourself a deadline after you have it done by this date, you know,
[Guest]: that sort of thing.
[Guest]: Like this previous album, I uploaded it to streaming services eight times.
[Guest]: Every time I'd upload it, I'd hear it in the car, I was like, I'm going to change that,
[Guest]: you know, and pull it back down.
[Guest]: And this eight times happened in a week, you know, and by the time it came to the last
[Guest]: upload, it was cutting it really fine.
[Guest]: And they were saying like, no, it won't be out by that day.
[Guest]: If you don't upload it today, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So it was like, okay, it's done.
[Guest]: Let's pull it out and see what happens.
[Guest]: So it's also it's ready when you when you have to let go, keep on editing.
[Guest]: That's also the thing is, like, in the early days, you had studio time, you had this much
[Guest]: to your time, you have to go, you have to finish the thing and get out like there's
[Guest]: a whole story of Led Zeppelin recording presence in like a very short span of time, because
[Guest]: the Rolling Stones were coming in and they had to finish.
[Guest]: And he did all his guitar overdubs in one night, which is amazing if you listen to that
[Guest]: album and think all the guitar parts on the album were done in one night.
[Guest]: So similarly, like, you know, having a deadline can kind of push you but I like to have a
[Guest]: reasonable, you know, window to, to move things around and see how things work.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about stopping the editor inside you from polishing something too much
[Amit Varma]: reminds me of this quote by a guy called William Maxwell.
[Amit Varma]: He was an editor at the New Yorker for about 40 years, and a great writer himself wrote
[Amit Varma]: some crazy books.
[Amit Varma]: And once he was asked about what he looks for in the writing that people sent to him.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, I don't look for style, I look for the breadth of life, you know, and he
[Amit Varma]: said this was something that he had learned to do over time, that it's not just about
[Amit Varma]: immaculate craft and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: It's about, you know, where is that kind of moment of magic?
[Amit Varma]: One thing I want to ask you about, which I've always wondered about in the context of both
[Amit Varma]: music and cinema, is the anxiety of avoiding cliche.
[Amit Varma]: For example, in writing, it's really common advice that you want to avoid cliches.
[Amit Varma]: Martin Amis, even his book of collective criticism is called the war against cliche.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in cinema and music, it seems a little harder than that.
[Amit Varma]: Because where do you distinguish between, say, cliche and convention and trope, like
[Amit Varma]: in a film, you know, if you have an establishing scene, you'll have a wide shot, then you'll
[Amit Varma]: go in, is it cliche?
[Amit Varma]: Is it convention?
[Amit Varma]: Is it just friendly to the audience to do it in a familiar way?
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, when you're playing music, I would imagine that there'll be tons of tropes, which
[Amit Varma]: are say common to blues or common to a particular kind of vibe that you're doing, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if there's a certain kind of melody, you'll mix it in a certain kind of way or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And some things can even become your own cliches.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, is that something that you worried about at any point the anxiety that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: am I really doing something new that where does one draw that line?
[Guest]: Stuff you've thought about?
[Guest]: There's always anxiety.
[Guest]: The whole imposter syndrome looms large, you know, but you kind of have to kind of almost
[Guest]: be your own psychologist and tell yourself, no, I do this well, just relax.
[Guest]: I'll do it.
[Guest]: You know, I know how to do this.
[Guest]: Just let me do it.
[Guest]: So that part of you, you know, has to be silenced.
[Guest]: The one which is always like, no, it's wrong.
[Guest]: No, it's wrong.
[Guest]: Like, okay, you chill for a little while, just do it.
[Guest]: And you can kind of feel when you have an honest reaction to your own music, to something
[Guest]: that you make.
[Guest]: And whether it is cliche or not, if the reaction you feel is tangibly genuine, then I don't
[Guest]: worry about it so much.
[Guest]: Because sometimes you can do a certain thing, which everyone has done, but you can do it
[Guest]: in a way which is sometimes it's like a parody.
[Guest]: Like I played it ironically, you know, something like that, like in zero, I would throw in
[Guest]: like heaps of these little things, these little phrases, like if you listen to the solo on
[Guest]: found, there's a lick from Santana from Europa, and there's one in the IA guitar parts sound
[Guest]: like Led Zeppelin, your time is going to come, you know, just the I would just throw these
[Guest]: things in to see like who would notice.
[Guest]: And then sometimes after 20 years, someone would come and say, hey, that's amazing.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: And you and you were notable for doing this in live performances as well.
[Guest]: Like live was a totally different thing.
[Guest]: It was like, you know, because at least on a recording, it's committing something to
[Guest]: posterity live.
[Guest]: At least then when no one was recording shit on their cell phones, you could do what the
[Guest]: hell you wanted.
[Guest]: I remember playing the solo from Metallica song, fade to black, in comfortably numb.
[Unknown]: And which go very well together, by the way, there's actually a video where a guy superimpose
[Unknown]: one over there.
[Unknown]: No, you were you would also do phrases from tujhe dekha toh yeh jana sanam inside IA and
[Unknown]: things like that.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's great.
[Guest]: That that came about at some gig where people would ask us to play Bollywood.
[Guest]: I was like, this is all I know.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and on the other side of the break, let's continue
[Amit Varma]: with your journey.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, the art of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: An online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: The course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course cost rupees 10,000 plus GST or about 150 dollars and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Warren Mendonza and Chuck Gopal.
[Amit Varma]: I often wonder, should one say Deepak, should one say Chuck, but we'll just say Chuck.
[Amit Varma]: Let's continue talking about Black Strat Blues.
[Amit Varma]: Like we have a whole bunch of albums and they're all pretty different, like the noticeable
[Amit Varma]: difference between Nights in Shining Karma and your second album, which was called the
[Amit Varma]: new album, though one could argue all subsequent albums are newer.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like you yourself said somewhere else that in that first album, the guitar
[Amit Varma]: is a hero.
[Amit Varma]: And you spoke about your process of kind of putting it together, you know, your brother's
[Amit Varma]: laying down the drum tracks and you're just playing everything else.
[Amit Varma]: But by the second album, you're building soundscapes.
[Amit Varma]: The guitar is no longer the prominent thing.
[Amit Varma]: There's this whole vibe that's kind of happening.
[Amit Varma]: And through later albums, other interesting things happen.
[Amit Varma]: There are these Indian influences like the Tanpura drone and so on or the tabla or whatever
[Amit Varma]: coming in at different points in time.
[Amit Varma]: So what was your evolution during these years of the Black Strat Blues, where it begins
[Amit Varma]: as a kind of a solo project, but then it becomes something more.
[Amit Varma]: So kind of take me through that process of, you know, your evolution as a musician and
[Amit Varma]: of Black Strat Blues as well at the same time.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So the first album was pretty much my brother and me, like I said, by the time the second
[Guest]: album happened, I had met a few other people.
[Guest]: So the first guy I met was, who still is one of my dearest friends here, a guy called Cole
[Guest]: Goodley.
[Guest]: So I'd gone to watch him at a gig.
[Guest]: Actually let me backtrack before that.
[Guest]: When I first moved here, I needed to get a job right away.
[Guest]: So it was at a local government organization and I met another friend of mine called Emma.
[Guest]: Now Emma had some songs which I thought were really cool.
[Guest]: So I said, let me help you put an album together.
[Guest]: So we started recording.
[Guest]: Then Emma said, I need drums on one song, but it has to be like a certain style.
[Guest]: So we had gone to watch this gig and we came across this drummer, Cole Goodley.
[Guest]: We said, this is the perfect guy for that song.
[Guest]: So at that time, I was working at a recording studio, I'd quit the day job and I was able
[Guest]: to use downtime.
[Guest]: The studio owner was a very sweet guy, so he said, you can use it whenever you want.
[Guest]: So we used the downtime to record Cole.
[Guest]: So Cole came over to the studio to record on Emma's song and he did his takes very quickly.
[Guest]: I think he had what he wanted, give us a few options.
[Guest]: That was done in an hour and a half.
[Guest]: And then we had the rest of the evening.
[Guest]: So then before he started putting his drums away, he started playing something.
[Guest]: And then he went into Akili's Last Stand, which is like one of my favorite Zeppelin
[Guest]: songs.
[Guest]: It's like, dude, just give me a second.
[Guest]: And I quickly grabbed the Les Paul, which was lying there, plugged it into the Marshall
[Guest]: and we started playing.
[Guest]: And then it went on from that to like, oh, do you know this?
[Guest]: You know that?
[Guest]: You know, and suddenly we found a whole bunch of common influences and a lifelong friend
[Guest]: was made in one evening.
[Guest]: So he said, hey, I'll play on your stuff if you want.
[Guest]: And I was playing in some demos and everything.
[Guest]: So he was like a huge contributor on that album, because I still think without his playing,
[Guest]: the music would never be, you know, I wouldn't say as good or whatever, just wouldn't have
[Guest]: been that, you know, whatever it is that you hear.
[Guest]: Because like on a song like Ode to a Sunny Day, he understood exactly what was required.
[Guest]: If you listen to that original album version, I still think it's probably like the definitive
[Guest]: version of that.
[Guest]: Some people like the live one on Gearhouse and everything like that.
[Guest]: But he brought a lot to the music, whatever he played on it, just, you know, when he heard
[Guest]: Happy Billy song, he knew instantly I was doing a manic depression on that.
[Guest]: So he just did the whole Mitch Mitchell thing.
[Guest]: And he was very good at channeling those, you know, influences like I do on guitar,
[Guest]: you know, channel a Hendrix or whoever, but still kind of make it your own.
[Guest]: So he was able to do that same thing on drums, which was awesome.
[Guest]: It didn't sound like, you know, it was a Hendrix song.
[Guest]: It sounded like someone who understood Hendrix, but played what had to be played to make that
[Guest]: thing come to life.
[Guest]: Similarly with Ode to a Rainy Day, he heard that and he picked up his sticks to start
[Guest]: the take.
[Guest]: And he said, right, I'll do my very best Nick Mason on this, you know, and listen to it.
[Guest]: And he would like sometimes stop and start and everything, but he kind of did all the
[Guest]: drums for that album in one day, which is kind of, you know, pretty amazing.
[Guest]: It's all, it's all done in one day.
[Guest]: And after he left, I still had some time before it like got too late.
[Guest]: And I remember I was so like inspired by what we had just recorded, and I finished Happy
[Guest]: Billy that same evening.
[Guest]: Can you imagine like you spend a whole day recording drums and you still have some energy
[Guest]: to put down all the guitar parts, you know, whatever.
[Guest]: So in that sense, the whole collaborative energy brought like a totally different thing
[Guest]: to the music.
[Guest]: And by the time of the second album, I had been living here for a while.
[Guest]: So I kind of become accustomed to, you know, a little bit of a slower pace of life.
[Guest]: Once the third album comes on, that becomes like another change altogether, because by
[Guest]: then I'd moved back to India.
[Guest]: If you notice, between the second and the third album, there's a good six years gap.
[Guest]: So that was me getting accustomed back into, you know, being a professional musician back
[Guest]: in India and everything like that.
[Guest]: So then by the time the third album came about, I had met Adi.
[Guest]: In fact, Adi and me had played together long back at a gig where his band and my band had
[Guest]: played together.
[Guest]: And then the vocal, Mike Blue, it was on a boat, the vocal PA Blue, so it became an instrumental
[Guest]: jam.
[Guest]: So that there's a picture of that.
[Guest]: I think I can share it with you later if you want.
[Guest]: And so we knew each other and everything, but we never really played together as such.
[Guest]: And then we had to play together at Ehsan and Roy's Coke Studio.
[Guest]: So that was the first time we spent a lot of time, because in between rehearsals and
[Guest]: we were just sitting and jamming.
[Guest]: I think at one point there was Prakash Sondake on pedal steel, who knows the whole dark side
[Guest]: of the moon, you know, all the steel parts.
[Guest]: And then Ehsan and Adi and I think Debu was playing drums.
[Guest]: So like between rehearsals for that episode, we were only playing Pink Floyd, it was hilarious.
[Guest]: So Adi and me started getting along at that point.
[Guest]: And Jai, who had played on the very first Blackstar Blues tour, but had never recorded
[Guest]: on any of the albums, but I figured Jai and Adi would be a good, you know, team together.
[Guest]: Because Jai is the guy who will push with serious energy, but Adi is the guy who will
[Guest]: hold things back and ground it.
[Guest]: So you have a perfect blend of those two, you know, because if you have both guys pushing
[Guest]: at the same time, it can blow out of control, you know, the car will just go off the track.
[Guest]: So one guy is holding it back and, you know, guiding things.
[Guest]: So that became a trio.
[Guest]: And then as a trio, we recorded the third album.
[Guest]: And I think we had also worked a fair bit with Karsh.
[Guest]: So Karsh and Jai had split drum duties on that third album.
[Guest]: Then the following year, I'd met Bevan on Clinton's Coke Studio.
[Guest]: So two Blackstar Blues band members came from Coke Studio.
[Guest]: So Bevan, I used to drive with him for Clinton's rehearsals, and I was playing him like all
[Guest]: the third album stuff and everything.
[Guest]: So he turns to me and he said, if you ever need a keyboard player, just let me know.
[Guest]: And I was shocked because like Bevan is like a seriously skilled musician and to play with
[Guest]: us jokers, like rock band jokers, I was like, you will play with us?
[Guest]: And he said, yeah, I'll play with you.
[Guest]: So at that point, it became like, you know, everything just fell into place and you could
[Guest]: kind of sense it.
[Guest]: And then that's when that last analog generation happened, which I think is probably after
[Guest]: the second album.
[Guest]: That's like my favorite one till now.
[Guest]: So that point, it became a band and then a lot of live gigs happened as well.
[Guest]: So that kind of solidified the lineup.
[Guest]: And then I put out an album called When It's Time When I knew it was going to be time for
[Guest]: that to to wind up and make the move back.
[Guest]: Because at that time, when my kid was born, it was like, OK, you kind of have to stop
[Guest]: thinking about yourself.
[Guest]: And then there's another person that you have to consider making plans and everything.
[Guest]: So at that point, it just became pretty evident that if a child is a New Zealand citizen,
[Guest]: she should probably grow up in New Zealand.
[Guest]: So at that point, it was a bit hard, you know, because we had kind of done so many killer
[Guest]: gigs and everything together.
[Guest]: But again, it was kind of almost like a hop back to the zero thing, where like, you know,
[Guest]: the band had solidified really nicely, but then you have to just say, you know, then
[Guest]: it was because of me that I moved and now it was because of her.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm also, you know, another sort of area I want to explore is what the other influences
[Amit Varma]: around you, how that shaped your music, like in one of your interviews, you speak about
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, during Ganpati, you used to hear that drumbeat and later you hear the
[Amit Varma]: same beat in Black Sabbath and you feel that there's sort of a commonality there.
[Amit Varma]: And in another interview, at one point, you said this quote that stuck with me, where
[Amit Varma]: you said, quote, I have an unproven theory that all forms of folk music are intertwined
[Amit Varma]: down to the pentatonic scale that exists in all cultures.
[Amit Varma]: After having worked with many Indian classical musicians, it's pretty easy to spot parallel
[Amit Varma]: threads to the music, and this makes collaboration a possibility.
[Amit Varma]: For me personally, it's a common areas found in rhythm percussion that are the most appealing,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, like, you know, the Ganpati beat and Black Sabbath, perhaps, and equally, you've
[Amit Varma]: been a sessions player in a lot of film recordings and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I think you've done a couple of Dance Masti albums, you've been Amit Trivedi's live guitarist,
[Amit Varma]: you've performed with, you know, Ehsan Loy, Rehman, all of these guys.
[Amit Varma]: So you're not just any kind of blues musician, you've got a much wider array of influences
[Amit Varma]: and most people like I often tell people that anyone in India is by default luckier than
[Amit Varma]: the rest of the world in at least one way, which is that we are multilingual, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in Europe, people will speak one language, we speak three, four languages, there's so
[Amit Varma]: much else coming in from there.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, in a musical sense, you've got that same sort of good fortune, not of
[Amit Varma]: just being surrounded by different kinds of music, but being able to listen to them and
[Amit Varma]: find these commonalities.
[Amit Varma]: So expand on this a little bit, tell me about, you know, what are these sort of different
[Amit Varma]: common elements?
[Amit Varma]: How has it shaped your music and so on?
[Guest]: Well, the the pentatonic scale is definitely there in every culture, you can hear that
[Guest]: there's a nice video that Bobby McFerrin shows, where he kind of has a theory that it's part
[Guest]: of our DNA, the pentatonic scale is part of our human DNA.
[Guest]: So that's worth checking out.
[Guest]: The 6-8 groove, you can hear that in every single culture, African, Celtic, you know,
[Guest]: American, Indian, tribal stuff, Asian music, you'll hear it.
[Guest]: I mean, everywhere you go, you'll find that 6-8, it has to come, and that's kind of one
[Guest]: of my favorite grooves.
[Guest]: So you listen to a song like Focus 3, for example, that's kind of where I exploited
[Guest]: that whole thing, which is like a visarjan kind of groove, but it's also like a blues
[Guest]: shuffle that, you know, that 6-8 thing as well.
[Guest]: So I love that, you know, for me, it's like finding something that's that's pretty universal,
[Guest]: you know, which again, you know, most people would be able to relate.
[Guest]: And then the fact that it's instrumental means there's no lyrics.
[Guest]: So technically, it shouldn't prevent from anyone who listens to any kind of language
[Guest]: to not be able to get it.
[Guest]: But in terms of relating to other musicians, I think you kind of have to keep your ears
[Guest]: open, because there's obviously some things they'll do in some particular raag, which,
[Guest]: you know, I'll have no idea, then I'll have to kind of ask them like, what exactly is
[Guest]: going on?
[Guest]: And once you, there are only 12 notes, but how you use those 12 notes, infinite, you
[Guest]: know, combinations, and then you have to listen to things like microtonal inflections, you
[Guest]: know, how they bend into that note.
[Guest]: There's another nice video, Derek Trucks talking about Indian music and how it's common, like
[Guest]: the microtones, to gospel music in America.
[Guest]: So that's worth checking out.
[Guest]: I can send you a link.
[Guest]: But every time I find something like that, it just makes me feel like warm and fuzzy
[Guest]: inside, you know, like there's something common among us all as humans, which doesn't matter
[Guest]: where you were born, you still can, you know, I mean, there's, I mean, have you gone to
[Guest]: a place where nobody likes Bob Marley, go to any beach town, there's some form of that
[Guest]: music which is playing.
[Guest]: So I don't know, I just think the ability of, you know, the whole genre thing is basically
[Guest]: a marketing construct.
[Guest]: It's basically people want to sell things in certain boxes.
[Guest]: So it has to be, I mean, would you call Led Zeppelin a reggae band just because they had
[Guest]: a reggae song?
[Guest]: No, they were just Led Zeppelin, you know, I mean, you could say they were a rock band.
[Guest]: So similarly, I wouldn't really consider myself a blues musician.
[Guest]: I think I have like a lifetime to live as a blues musician to be classified as one.
[Guest]: I love the blues.
[Guest]: I love where it comes from.
[Guest]: I love also expanding it.
[Guest]: I think like early cream, they did cool things with the blues, where they would like taking
[Guest]: traditional forms and kind of, you know, making it a little bit more of its time.
[Guest]: So I like artists who do that, who take from traditional forms and are able to, you know,
[Guest]: do something different with it, where you can retain, you know, where it's coming from,
[Guest]: but you know, it's not that, where it's coming from.
[Guest]: It's something else.
[Unknown]: You know, one of the questions that I wanted to ask was, so you spoke about how you're
[Unknown]: a fan of artists who take something with an existing genre and add on to it.
[Unknown]: And that's really how music evolves, right?
[Unknown]: So have you seen any of that happen recently?
[Unknown]: Like, for example, you can argue that rock is now, rock and heavy metal are now traditional
[Unknown]: forms of music in some sense, like how the blues and early rock and beat music was.
[Unknown]: I've come across some artists doing fascinating things, like an artist I came across recently
[Unknown]: is called Carpenter Brute, who takes traditional heavy metal and adds a lot of influences from
[Unknown]: electronic music.
[Unknown]: So it's basically just him.
[Unknown]: It's basically a metal DJ on stage.
[Unknown]: And while I may not be a complete fan of things like that, I think that pushes music in different
[Unknown]: directions, even if it makes some people slightly uncomfortable.
[Unknown]: I saw this at a metal fest, so it obviously alienated the audience a fair bit.
[Unknown]: Have you come across any examples like this?
[Unknown]: And like, just generally, where do you think music, especially the types that we love so
[Unknown]: much, where could it go?
[Unknown]: Do you see like more of a role of traditional scales and instruments, for example, around
[Unknown]: the world?
[Unknown]: I've come across music like I was just telling Amit before our recording, I came across something
[Unknown]: called Torek guitar, which is North African psychedelic guitar.
[Unknown]: And you would love this absolutely with artists like Umdu Mukhtar, if I've got the pronunciation
[Unknown]: right, who play a very Hendrix like fuzz sound, but with what is unmistakably Arabic influence
[Unknown]: or that or North African influence of sorts or like Tinariwen.
[Unknown]: Have you come across any like this?
[Unknown]: And what do you think about stuff like this?
[Unknown]: Like, where do you think at least the music that we like rock and metal could go?
[Guest]: For me, like if, like, for example, if I hear a bit of Hendrix, I'm immediately drawn in
[Guest]: because that's like such a, you know, like if you're ever in doubt about what to play
[Guest]: on guitar, do a journey, it'll work for most, you know, that's, that's also like one of
[Guest]: the things that you like, I know certain things will work, you know.
[Guest]: So like you said, like, it sounds a bit like that Hendrix fuzz thing.
[Guest]: That's kind of like a universal sound now, you know, like any guitar player across the
[Guest]: world knows what, what Hendrix sounds like.
[Guest]: There's a really nice band from Sweden called Dungeon.
[Guest]: So it's spelled D-U-N-G-E-N.
[Guest]: They sing in Swedish, but it doesn't really matter because the music is amazing.
[Guest]: Guitar player is like a little bit of a, you know, you can hear the Hendrix influence,
[Guest]: but he's also like totally his own guy.
[Guest]: So that's another thing which, you know, you can take the similar sound like that Hendrix
[Guest]: fuzzed out like relic guitar sound and do different things with it.
[Guest]: So I would recommend checking out, there's one album called Ta Det Lunt, L-U-G-N-T.
[Guest]: So that's, I think that's their second or third album.
[Guest]: And there's one album called Four.
[Guest]: If you listen to that Four album, there's one killer song called Mina Damar Ok Fasana.
[Guest]: I'm pronouncing it horribly, but whatever you can from my, you know, you can kind of
[Guest]: get the spelling.
[Guest]: So this song, you can hear that fuzz guitar thing, but it almost sounds like Arabic or
[Guest]: Indian in a slightly Bollywood way, it goes something like that.
[Guest]: And the groove is man, like this fat ass, like something like that, you know?
[Guest]: So then, you know, you can, you can, you're like different influences, but it's coming
[Guest]: together in such a unique way, which just sounds like that and nothing else.
[Guest]: You know, again, which brings you back, like you, you're a little bit of the commonality
[Guest]: in it, but it's something totally different, which you've never heard before.
[Guest]: And that like, is what I live for.
[Guest]: Have you ever heard of this guy called Josh Fix, by any chance?
[Guest]: Josh Fix?
[Guest]: No, I haven't.
[Guest]: So this guy, I think he came out in 2004 or 5.
[Guest]: And he had this album called, I'll send you the name later.
[Guest]: But it sounded like Queen, Elton John, you know, that kind of thing, piano driven rock,
[Guest]: but the production is immaculate.
[Guest]: Like you can't help but not like it.
[Guest]: And he found quite a few fans in like, say, Steve Lukather, you know, like, you know,
[Guest]: prominent musicians.
[Guest]: And then he had an EP after that with the most killer name, This Town Is Starting To
[Guest]: Make Me Angry.
[Guest]: So two, like one great album, one amazing EP.
[Guest]: And then you never heard of him again, you know, he just disappeared.
[Guest]: And I guess he kind of grew disillusioned or whatever.
[Guest]: And that's only something I'm speculating.
[Guest]: But with an artist like that, you can again, you know, where he's coming from very clearly.
[Guest]: But again, it's so uniquely him, like just the way things are put together.
[Guest]: So that can be a facet of your originality, the way you put things together, from styles
[Guest]: that have come from you.
[Guest]: So you can take things that are very, like, you know, almost universal in a way, but combine
[Guest]: them in a certain way, which, you know, I guess people have been doing that in every
[Guest]: genre for the last 20 years.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to get back to a question that we touched upon right at the start, which is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the question of form and content, how they affect each other, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: every form that we kind of have came because of a physical reason, you could only fit so
[Amit Varma]: many minutes of music on an LP.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that's your album length, or a radio will typically, you know, they'll
[Amit Varma]: play a three minute this thing.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that becomes kind of a standard.
[Amit Varma]: Today, you will find bands optimizing for the first 30 seconds on Spotify, because you
[Amit Varma]: got to make the guy finish 30 seconds, you know, when advanced mics first came about
[Amit Varma]: in the 1920s, people started singing differently, Bing Crosby could whisper into the mic, and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, didn't have to sort of throw his voice today, you know, record labels will
[Amit Varma]: ask artists to have that 15 second catchy bit, which you know, TikTok or reels can pick
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Amit Varma]: But what has happened is that we somehow as creators, and I'm talking across everything,
[Amit Varma]: not just music, we get stuck in old formats, writers will only think of 800 word pieces
[Amit Varma]: or 100,000 word books, or filmmakers will think in terms of like a 24 minute TV episode
[Amit Varma]: or a 90 minute Hollywood film, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But one, in many fields, those formats don't matter anymore, the reasons why they came
[Amit Varma]: about in the first place are, they don't matter, they've gone.
[Amit Varma]: And in music, you've got new imperatives, like sort of the one that we discussed.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what has happened is that many of these formats have become cliches, or formulas,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so I got this video on YouTube, where this guy was analyzing the formula for
[Amit Varma]: a perfect pop song, which was 114.2 beats per minute, 3 minutes 59 seconds long, moderately
[Amit Varma]: danceable in the key of C major, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: There's another video that breaks down what Max Martin does, you know, where your chorus
[Amit Varma]: will start between 40 seconds to a minute, your lyrics will be below fourth grade reading
[Amit Varma]: level, simple harmonic structures, short, unique intros, because many people are, you
[Amit Varma]: know, kind of, if you're playing, if you're a DJ changing tracks on a loud this thing,
[Amit Varma]: the intro has to be catchy for people to stay on the dance floor, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So all these formulas have evolved, and they've evolved because of one commercial imperatives,
[Amit Varma]: because obviously labels will look at what is successful and just want to repeat that
[Amit Varma]: and that becomes a formula.
[Amit Varma]: Two, it's because you've gotten used to a particular kind of form.
[Amit Varma]: So you think, oh, every song has to be three minutes or four minutes or whatever that so
[Amit Varma]: called optimal length is.
[Amit Varma]: And three, because of the way our brains are wired, as you said, all our brains are wired
[Amit Varma]: in the same kind of way.
[Amit Varma]: Something will sound musical to us, something else will not sound musical to us.
[Amit Varma]: So in some senses, you're kind of catering to how our brains are wired, and you kind
[Amit Varma]: of therefore slip into those same old grooves.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sort of thinking about this, because, you know, one of the things you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that Auckland allowed you to do, for example, just going there, and maybe it's just a part
[Amit Varma]: of maturity of any artist or any person is that you're able to sit back and re examine
[Amit Varma]: all of this, and you know, your role in all of this and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you think about all of these things that, you know, Chuck in an old piece had,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, written about your stuff very, I'll quote Chuck now, there's something in his
[Amit Varma]: compositions that move from familiar intro, to slow part where people can soak it in and
[Amit Varma]: notice how good the other musicians are, to faster part when the pace picks up to epic
[Amit Varma]: ending when everyone goes berserk, fuck how good is everyone in this band that just works
[Amit Varma]: with any audience.
[Amit Varma]: And he continued elaborating on that.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of that?
[Amit Varma]: Because I guess when you start without even thinking about it without even thinking, oh,
[Amit Varma]: this is a formula, this is what I need to do, you just gravitate to that.
[Amit Varma]: But then later on, you've tried many different things in different structures.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how you sort of think about all of this.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, for every song that fits that, that formula, there's also another one that
[Guest]: doesn't, you know, so it just depends upon, you know, which are the ones that you latch
[Guest]: on to.
[Guest]: The thing is, also, you have to keep in mind, are you making music for mass consumption?
[Guest]: Are you doing it for your own gratification?
[Guest]: I do it currently, because I want to make myself happy.
[Guest]: Now, the moment the commercial consideration comes into mind, I may have to change the
[Guest]: way I do it.
[Guest]: At this point, at least I'm still able to at least make the music I want to, and still
[Guest]: have a roof over my head.
[Guest]: But that could change, you know, another day.
[Guest]: And then I may have to totally, you know, re-tweak, maybe I have to do 30 second songs
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: I mean, I worked in advertising for a very long time, so I know how advertising music
[Guest]: works.
[Guest]: And there is definitely like a certain formula that has to work in context, like it can't
[Guest]: get in the way of the voiceover, for example, that's like the golden rule, otherwise they
[Guest]: will pull it down.
[Guest]: The music track gets pulled down and the voiceover is on top of everything.
[Guest]: That VO is God.
[Guest]: So with confirming to certain parameters, now, obviously, the parameters you confirm
[Guest]: to when you make music for yourself are your own preferences.
[Guest]: You like things to sound a certain way.
[Guest]: And you know, I'm a little bit old, so I still want to make an album rather than, you know,
[Guest]: a TikTok reel.
[Guest]: It may just change.
[Guest]: Like my daughter may suddenly say, Dad, make me a song, which is 30 seconds, I'll make
[Guest]: a song.
[Guest]: I want to see if you're happy.
[Guest]: So I'll do it.
[Guest]: You know, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So I'm never going to like discount, like saying this is the right way or that is the
[Guest]: wrong way.
[Guest]: Everything is like at this point in my life, everything goes.
[Guest]: You see what you like and you latch on to that.
[Guest]: And there's so much music out there.
[Guest]: So let's, you know, try to keep ourselves happy by listening to music we like.
[Guest]: Apart from that, you know, the attention spans are different these days.
[Guest]: So, you know, where a double album would be something that people could consume in one
[Guest]: sitting in this day and age, I don't think a majority of people, even I find myself like
[Guest]: there are certain times like once everyone's gone to bed, then I can put on an album and
[Guest]: listen to it in entirety.
[Guest]: And these days also, I find like, I'll just not, you know, do something else.
[Guest]: Like I'm always like something or the others there that, you know, like in my room, I'll
[Guest]: be cleaning up something or something while doing it.
[Guest]: But at least my musical attention is focused on what's playing, you know, in that sense.
[Guest]: So for me, it's like, again, the trick is to keep finding music that makes you feel
[Guest]: that way.
[Guest]: And, you know, the old stuff, there'll be certain music, which no matter how many times
[Guest]: like my daughter and I listen to The Beatles.
[Guest]: So I listen to Blackboard in my car literally nine or ten times on repeat.
[Guest]: And I don't get, I don't have a problem with that, you know, it's a cool song.
[Guest]: So no worries with it on repeat.
[Guest]: So the people who are making music by formula, I have no problem with them doing that because
[Guest]: that's what they have to do at that point of time.
[Guest]: So, you know, if you write for Bollywood, now the director becomes your, you know, your
[Guest]: God.
[Guest]: You have to cater to his whims.
[Guest]: And the director, whoever's paying you, has to be happy, everyone is happy, you know,
[Guest]: and then it becomes like that approval by committee.
[Guest]: That's the process I hate the most because everyone feels they have to give some feedback.
[Guest]: Otherwise, their job is not warranted, you know, they're just sitting there like useless
[Guest]: people otherwise.
[Guest]: So that is not something that I'm personally fond of, in that sense, at least I want to
[Guest]: be able to, you know, at least with my own music, if I put it out under like Warren Mendonca
[Guest]: or Black Style Blues, at least I want something that, you know, goes out with me being happy.
[Guest]: And then there's a good chance of other people being happy as well, by default.
[Amit Varma]: Like you mentioned short attention spans, you know, five years back, when I started
[Amit Varma]: this podcast, my impression was that attention spans are short, you got to hook them in the
[Amit Varma]: first 15 seconds, don't do an episode more than 10-15 minutes, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I realized I was spectacularly wrong, because tons of people crave deep content.
[Amit Varma]: And especially in the case of podcasts, people are a captive audience when they're listening
[Amit Varma]: to podcasts, they're commuting or working out or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: They're listening at higher speeds, which of course doesn't happen with music, but they're
[Amit Varma]: listening to podcasts at higher speeds.
[Amit Varma]: And people just crave depth, nobody else gives you depth.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, there are times of the day when you have a short attention span,
[Amit Varma]: and there are times where you really want to sit down and listen to that double album.
[Amit Varma]: And this was something I realized.
[Amit Varma]: But the question I'm coming to is this, that what I have noticed is that for content that
[Amit Varma]: goes deeper, your absolute numbers may not be as high as something that is shallower
[Amit Varma]: and something that is hooking you in 15 seconds and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But the level of engagement is way, way, way, way higher, your audience cares so much more
[Amit Varma]: about you.
[Amit Varma]: It's personal, it's intimate, all of that is happening.
[Amit Varma]: So the dual question to you is that both as a consumer of music, and as a creator of music,
[Amit Varma]: have you felt that connect that, you know, when you're doing stuff that makes you happy,
[Amit Varma]: I think you're automatically guaranteed, perhaps to not reach out to as many people as you
[Amit Varma]: would, but to everyone you reach out to, you're making them happy as well.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that deeper connect both from your listeners towards yourself, and also
[Amit Varma]: from you towards the music you like that you just feel this more intimate connection towards
[Amit Varma]: this person?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, for me, when I meet people who have never met before, but they tell me like,
[Guest]: I really love the music you do.
[Guest]: There's part of me which is like that rush song limelight, like I can't pretend a stranger
[Guest]: is a long lost friend, you know, that part of me is like, there's nothing real about
[Guest]: this interaction, if I have never met you before, but I have to shut off that part of
[Guest]: me and say, this person is actually connecting to me as a human being, because they first
[Guest]: connected to my music.
[Guest]: And the whole idea of having like Blackstar Blues as a, you know, a moniker or a project
[Guest]: name was just to say, okay, this is the music.
[Guest]: Now you listen to the music and you leave me alone.
[Guest]: You know, I'm not part of this whole relationship, your relationship is between you as a listener
[Guest]: and the music, not between you and the listener and me as the person, maybe me as a musician.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So there has to be that disconnect and then you have like, social media and everything
[Guest]: coming with that line gets a bit blurred.
[Guest]: And then I guess also like being a dad, I've kind of become less of that, you know, it
[Guest]: doesn't really get to me because like, there's a certain kind of social awkwardness I have
[Guest]: in any situation.
[Guest]: If I don't know someone, it's very hard for me to relate to them unless they say, like,
[Guest]: if they start talking about the Beatles automatically, like they become my friends.
[Guest]: I mean, if I know that they know what they're talking about, that's something I like, even
[Guest]: people actually interested in something, they can talk about anything as long as they're
[Guest]: actually interested in it and they have a proper knowledge of it.
[Guest]: And there are people who just like to fill the air with conversation with, you know,
[Guest]: meaningless conversation, I can't deal with that.
[Guest]: So sometimes at social gatherings, like, you know, I have to kind of hide me and my wife
[Guest]: and that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So even in these situations, like after gig, I make it a point to stay back and talk to
[Guest]: everyone who wants to talk to me, you know, so if they feel like they feel like connected
[Guest]: to me as a person, who am I to say that's not real, you know, in that sense.
[Guest]: So it's progressively become easier over the years for me to do that.
[Guest]: Like, initially, I remember that gig where Chuck first came at Miti Bai College, people
[Guest]: taking photographs, and he wanted to take photographs of me, I was like, no, I don't feel comfortable
[Guest]: doing this, please let me just play on stage and go home, that's what I want to do.
[Unknown]: And to quote your bassist from that gig, you tried to introduce the band, you did a pretty
[Unknown]: bad job of it.
[Unknown]: And Bobby grabbed the mic and said, as you can all see, Warren is very new at this mic
[Unknown]: business.
[Unknown]: What he means is can all of you come forward, I still have a video of that.
[Unknown]: That was pretty hilarious.
[Unknown]: But yeah, your banter skills have improved dramatically since then.
[Guest]: Someone just asked me once, what was the biggest difference between Blacksand Blues and Zeo?
[Guest]: I said, well, in Zeo, I didn't have a mic in front of me.
[Guest]: That was amazing.
[Guest]: The moment I hear my voice on the monitors, I instantly feel awkward.
[Guest]: And then I just start mumbling and then it becomes worse because I'm just like talking
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: No one can understand what I'm saying.
[Guest]: I remember one gig, they delayed our soundcheck severely.
[Guest]: So I was super pissed off because it was early in the morning, I was like, listen, don't
[Guest]: call a band for like a seven o'clock soundcheck.
[Guest]: If you can't meet that requirement, just call them and say, come later, you know.
[Guest]: But that wasn't the case.
[Guest]: I was damn pissed off by the time we got on stage.
[Guest]: And apparently that was the best I've ever been behind the mic.
[Guest]: We played like a smashing set because everyone was pissed off.
[Guest]: Apparently, I was very loud and audible because our front of house engineer told me, you don't
[Guest]: have to keep pushing up my fader.
[Guest]: In fact, I had to pull it down, he was shouting on the mic.
[Amit Varma]: So my question for you, Chuck, was this, that the same thing what I asked him, you were
[Amit Varma]: actually one of the early big fans of Zero and Warren and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So what what connected you feel like, like, do you feel there's something to that?
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel, for example, that a fan of someone like Warren or a similar musician or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: will have a deeper engagement than say a fan of somebody more popular?
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to be disrespectful to someone by taking names, but say a Justin Bieber,
[Amit Varma]: you know, do you feel that the connect would be, you know, that connect would be broader
[Amit Varma]: but shallower?
[Unknown]: Yeah, 100%.
[Unknown]: I think it will definitely be broader and shallower.
[Unknown]: I'll answer.
[Unknown]: I mean, there were multiple questions there, right?
[Unknown]: So I'll answer what drew me to Warren's music for the first time, and I won't embarrass
[Unknown]: you too much.
[Unknown]: I think I've done that enough through all the articles and stuff that I wrote.
[Unknown]: I think I was just blown away by the fact that an Indian musician could make guitar
[Unknown]: solos like this, honestly, and, and, and, of course, the band themselves, the songs
[Unknown]: by themselves were pretty great.
[Unknown]: So I was just blown away by that.
[Unknown]: And from there, I was, I actually, I wasn't an early fan of Zero, I would actually call
[Unknown]: myself one of the later fans of Zero and an early fan of Blackstar Blues, because I got
[Unknown]: in at around that time, I actually discovered Zero when Warren was out of the band and was
[Unknown]: in Auckland at that time.
[Unknown]: So I was right bang in the middle, and that transition happened, and that blew me away
[Unknown]: that you can do this and this at the same time.
[Unknown]: And I think that's what really drew me in.
[Unknown]: And arguably, if you had continued playing the way you did, as Zero, maybe I wouldn't
[Unknown]: have been as much of a fan because I think that transition and the fact that you balance
[Unknown]: both so effortlessly, was important to me.
[Unknown]: To the second question.
[Unknown]: Yes, there's no doubt about it.
[Unknown]: I think there is something about fewer fans, but deeper engagement, again, something that
[Unknown]: we discussed so much on when I came on when I was talking about the Australian band Neo
[Unknown]: Blizzard is for example, I think it is there, I think, I think if there is a deeper connect,
[Unknown]: not only will they be evangelists for the music more, but and Warren, you can correct
[Unknown]: me if I'm completely off the mark on this, but also be willing to support you more for
[Unknown]: this either by spreading the music, buying the music as opposed to streaming on Spotify,
[Unknown]: etc.
[Unknown]: That's my feeling as a fan.
[Unknown]: And I've done that for artists that I am a supporter of.
[Unknown]: So yeah, that's my perspective on that.
[Guest]: Yeah, the guys who like it really like it.
[Unknown]: Yeah, well, I'll tell you that for sure.
[Guest]: Because there's been guys who have been listening from the first album.
[Guest]: I remember there's one guy at the time where I put it on my website for free.
[Guest]: And I said, this is my PayPal account, you know, if you feel like donating some money
[Guest]: so I can buy some better recording gear, then you know, feel free.
[Guest]: So one guy donated $200 at the time, which was like, wow, you know, so that guy wrote
[Guest]: back to me, I said, dude, thank you so much, like, this is really come at a good time.
[Guest]: You get the album advanced release for free for life.
[Guest]: So I make it a point now before every release, I send a copy.
[Guest]: So I never really forgot that, you know, gesture of his.
[Guest]: But there have been people who have been there from the first album, like, you know, Chuck,
[Guest]: who still are, you know, listeners and support the music.
[Guest]: So I'm really grateful for that.
[Guest]: I mean, I cannot like, you know, be more thankful.
[Guest]: But the whole thing is like, then when you have people who don't see your music as a
[Guest]: disposable commodity, yeah, then you kind of feel that interaction is a little bit more
[Guest]: real, you know, the way someone is just listening to Black Star Cruise, because their friends
[Guest]: said they're a cool band, and tomorrow they've forgotten about it.
[Guest]: I mean, these are not the people that tend to, you know, engage long term with your brand
[Guest]: or your music or whatever.
[Guest]: So I'm really grateful for the people who really like it enough, like when I put out
[Guest]: this most recent album, I put it on sale for Bandcamp first, and then it went on to streaming
[Guest]: two weeks later.
[Guest]: And it pretty much covered the entire recording cost of the album.
[Guest]: I was like, wow, you know, really, I wasn't expecting that at all.
[Guest]: But it kind of made me feel like nice and warm about the whole thing that there are
[Guest]: people who actually care about your music, they know they're going to get it for free
[Guest]: on your streaming services on YouTube or whatever, they'll still, you know, take the effort to,
[Guest]: you know, support you and put their money where their love for the music is.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to talk about the commercial aspect of it, because, you know, one of the areas
[Amit Varma]: like you talk about the high engagement and where that directly leads is that today creators
[Amit Varma]: are able to connect directly with whoever's reading them or listening to them or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: and monetize some of that capture some of that value, because anyone who listens to
[Amit Varma]: your music is in a sense paying for it, because time is money.
[Amit Varma]: You spend one hour listening to blackstrap blues, you know, you're spending it and today
[Amit Varma]: we are in that unique age where you don't have to go through intermediaries like platforms
[Amit Varma]: and advertising and so on, you can capture some of it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I've had this experience when I opened up support for my podcast as well,
[Amit Varma]: and was very touched by a response I didn't expect, which has been enough to kind of keep
[Amit Varma]: me independent all this while and doing what I do.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when things started going well for you, blackstrap blues happened, all that happened,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in a musical sense, commercially, there was so much flux, that the revenue models
[Amit Varma]: of the music industry kind of were going through this crazy flux, all the labels come, they
[Amit Varma]: sue Napster and all that, they get that shut down, then iTunes comes and there's nothing
[Amit Varma]: they can do because Apple has more lawyers and so on, as Ted Joyer says, and everything
[Amit Varma]: kind of goes to hell.
[Amit Varma]: And you do this very interesting thing where you say that, look, I just want my music to
[Amit Varma]: reach people, I want people to listen to it, you put it up for free, and your first two
[Amit Varma]: albums are out there, they're up for free.
[Amit Varma]: How have things evolved since then, because the downside of all of this, it seems to me,
[Amit Varma]: is that creators are also forced to simultaneously be entrepreneurs, right?
[Amit Varma]: Someone may be a talented musician, but they may not have a head for business or a head
[Amit Varma]: for how to use social media, and so on and so forth, and be able to do the rest of that.
[Amit Varma]: So how have you therefore handled all of that in terms of sure, you make stuff for yourself,
[Amit Varma]: and that makes you happy, but you also have deeply committed fans and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: How has it evolved so far?
[Amit Varma]: Where do you see it going from here?
[Amit Varma]: And do you think for musicians in general, how should musicians in general approach this
[Amit Varma]: new world that we are in?
[Amit Varma]: Like 30 years ago, the model would have been that maybe you tour a little bit, build a
[Amit Varma]: bit of local following, attract a record label, label comes out, and, you know, either you're
[Amit Varma]: lucky enough to make it big, or, you know, you're back to whatever, being a journeyman
[Amit Varma]: band.
[Amit Varma]: Today, that's really kind of different.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through a little bit of this landscape, and what are your thoughts on it and so on?
[Guest]: Well, the cost of recording has been coming down significantly due to the advance of technology.
[Guest]: So that's the first thing we need to look at.
[Guest]: So by the time I did the first Blackstrap Blues album, my recording costs were literally
[Guest]: nil because I'd already owned all the equipment I needed to make that album.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, now, as an artist, you sometimes tend to grow in the scope of, you know, what
[Guest]: you're trying to achieve and what you're trying to capture for posterity.
[Guest]: So then, say, tomorrow, you decide you've written a piece of music that requires an
[Guest]: orchestra.
[Guest]: Now, that is not something I can record in my bedroom.
[Guest]: I can program it, you know, to a certain extent, but it's not going to sound like an orchestra.
[Guest]: Now, you have to decide.
[Guest]: Now, if I have to have that orchestra, then the money is going to come from somewhere.
[Guest]: So either I put it in myself, or I have to apply for funding.
[Guest]: At least here, the New Zealand government is awesome about that.
[Guest]: They have funding avenues that you can apply for.
[Guest]: I mean, the competition is severe, but you can if your music is deemed good enough and,
[Guest]: you know, commercially viable enough.
[Guest]: So there's some gatekeeper in that sense, you know, the moment your personal investment
[Guest]: is exceeded by the cost.
[Guest]: So for me, personally, as long as I was able to produce the album to the best of my financial
[Guest]: and artistic ability, I was happy with it.
[Guest]: It was cool, you know, because the first album, no recording cost, second, I was able to use
[Guest]: studio downtime.
[Guest]: So you know, got away with that.
[Guest]: Third album, we recovered our investment on studio time from iTunes sales.
[Guest]: Now, that time, you could actually sell music on iTunes and OK, listen, and all these sites
[Guest]: where people actually pay 100 rupees or whatever.
[Guest]: And if say, you know, 1000 people bought your album at 100 rupees, that's what like one
[Guest]: lakh, you know, which at that time was kind of what the recording cost was.
[Guest]: So we were pretty cool there.
[Guest]: We were still making most of our music as a band playing live.
[Guest]: But even that wasn't enough to, you know, sustain a life in Bombay.
[Guest]: I had to play with Vishal Shekhar and Amit Srivedi and ARMR and stuff that I enjoyed
[Guest]: doing that totally because that was a totally different aspect of being a musician, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: But that is what kind of kept things alive in terms of having a lifestyle and being able
[Guest]: to afford that.
[Guest]: Now, the moment that's gone with the whole pandemic thing and everything and I've moved
[Guest]: back here, it becomes a little bit more of a, you know, a juggle and you kind of have
[Guest]: a more short term budget in terms of making sure your mortgage payments are met and so
[Guest]: on and so forth.
[Guest]: So as long as you're above that, I can continue to do what I do.
[Guest]: Now, there's also a lot of commercial music that I've been involved in, which is kind
[Guest]: of what still, you know, pays the bills.
[Guest]: And then I mix stuff for other people, I do guitar sessions and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So as long as, you know, those two sides are juggled, it's like our heads above the water.
[Guest]: The moment that doesn't happen, anything could change, you know, I mean, the world we live
[Guest]: in right now is just like every day, something new is happening.
[Guest]: And like the life that we knew six months back is gone.
[Guest]: Something else, you got to do this, and then it becomes the norm.
[Guest]: So again, till I guess this COVID thing stabilizes a bit, and then we actually have a stable
[Guest]: income stream.
[Guest]: We kind of have to, you know, for me, teaching has really helped because during the moment
[Guest]: the gig stopped, I was like, look, I've got like three or four months before I've got
[Guest]: to move to New Zealand.
[Guest]: So you know, I might as well find something to do with time.
[Guest]: So I started teaching on Zoom.
[Guest]: And like that kind of paid for the whole move, you know, the whole moving costs and everything
[Guest]: I met with, but just teaching.
[Guest]: So that again, fluctuates up and down.
[Guest]: I think every time there's a lockdown, the amount of students goes up and everything
[Guest]: things open up as people find other things to do.
[Guest]: I mean, I still have a few students that, you know, stuck around for like, since like
[Guest]: I started teaching.
[Guest]: So you know, it's a bit of a very up in the air kind of thing.
[Guest]: And you're trying to make sense of, you know, random events and sequences of things happening.
[Guest]: And all you have to do is kind of manage to keep the bike balanced.
[Guest]: Anything could happen.
[Guest]: One, you could hit a stone, but if you hit a stone, then you kind of, you know, regain
[Guest]: your balance.
[Guest]: But, you know, as long as you keep the bike, you know, on two wheels and don't fall down,
[Guest]: it's all good.
[Guest]: So when that happens, then you cross that bridge when you come to it.
[Guest]: So it's very hard actually to make long term plans at this point, you have to be flexible
[Guest]: enough to kind of just adapt to, you know, what every day brings.
[Guest]: That's one thing I guess the pandemic has taught me like, you know, just every day is
[Guest]: a blessing.
[Guest]: So you don't know if you're going to be around tomorrow, let's do the best we can.
[Guest]: And in terms of like the actual stuff that you make as an artist, that's going to survive
[Guest]: long after you've bounced from this planet.
[Guest]: So you know, that's something at least you put all of your current available energies
[Guest]: into to at least kind of leave something.
[Guest]: And now at least I have a daughter.
[Guest]: So that's something else that will survive me, you know.
[Guest]: But it's like, you just do the best you can every day man, it's like so hard to, you know,
[Guest]: I'm the last person that will actually give you, you know, concrete advice and say, this
[Guest]: is what you should be doing.
[Guest]: And this is, you know, invest your money, you don't invest, I don't know all that sort
[Guest]: of thing.
[Guest]: You know, it's like, as long as you get to play guitar tomorrow, that's a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about teaching because one of the you know, when I started my writing
[Amit Varma]: course, and I started teaching, I realized that I actually started learning more and
[Amit Varma]: looking deeper into a subject I thought I knew pretty well, right?
[Amit Varma]: So how has teaching changed your appreciation of music?
[Amit Varma]: And has it actually changed you as a musician and just the way you think of the work you
[Amit Varma]: do?
[Guest]: Yeah, I've become a better communicator of ideas, I'm able to edit my, you know, thought
[Guest]: process really quickly.
[Guest]: And you know, because sometimes I can be thinking of five things at once, but then that person
[Guest]: doesn't have the time to listen to all five.
[Guest]: So you have to pick the best thing that you're thinking of, and communicate that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I've had to kind of actually study what I do, because sometimes they asked me to like,
[Guest]: how did you play that?
[Guest]: And I can't say I closed my eyes and it came out, you know, which is actually the truth.
[Guest]: But you have to kind of go back and deconstruct the process, even though that was something
[Guest]: you were never thinking about at the time.
[Guest]: So you kind of have to go back and trace your steps and say, okay, what was I thinking of
[Guest]: when I when I played that, you know, kind of trying to give them an idea of
[Guest]: my headspace, because that's very important to whatever it is I play.
[Guest]: There's no chance I would have played the same thing if I was feeling it, you know,
[Guest]: different.
[Guest]: And then the whole idea of communicating how to channel emotion and vibe into what you're
[Guest]: playing becomes tough.
[Guest]: Then you start having to tell them more about the technicalities, like, okay, this is not
[Guest]: in tune, and that is not in time, and that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So, you know, a lot of people, I think, also tend to disregard simplicity, when my thing
[Guest]: is like, look, it's the hardest thing to actually play simple things well, because there's nothing
[Guest]: to hide behind, you know, you got to have to have full conviction or whatever it is
[Guest]: you're playing, if you're playing like three notes that span this much of time.
[Guest]: So you have to, you know, be able to communicate that to someone in that sense, like saying,
[Guest]: you know, take it easy, we'll do it one step at a time, because they always want to, like,
[Guest]: you know, learn the complicated stuff at first, and I've said, I never even, I used to enjoy
[Guest]: listening to complicated music, but I never thought that I would actually play it.
[Guest]: Now is the time I go back and learn those solos, which I always admired, you know, like
[Guest]: Steely Dan and stuff like that.
[Guest]: Now is the time I'm able to do that, when I can actually have the faculty to take it
[Guest]: apart and then learn how to play it.
[Guest]: So I never set my sights too high in that sense, I set my sights on low hanging fruit
[Guest]: and learned how to, you know, capture it really well.
[Guest]: Once I was able to do that well, then I was able to go to the next stage and start, you
[Guest]: know, getting all that stuff.
[Guest]: So like, I have to tell them, like, look, it's fine, just do simple stuff well, we'll
[Guest]: deal with that, you know, later.
[Guest]: It kind of reinforces your own taste as well, you know, because it's also like giving someone
[Guest]: the reassurance that you'll get there sometime, just put in the time.
[Guest]: Very few people actually have the time that is required to get to the level they have
[Guest]: in mind.
[Guest]: So I was like, let's just aim at getting better.
[Guest]: And then because you're doing that, you notice like certain things in my own playing, which
[Guest]: I would find to be like weaknesses, I was never able to use this finger that well.
[Guest]: But then you can't tell someone that, look, you have to use that finger, and then not
[Guest]: be able to do it yourself.
[Guest]: So first you have to learn how to do that.
[Guest]: And someone's like, how do I alternate pick this and I can't say like, look, dude, I can't
[Guest]: play that.
[Guest]: So I show them how to play it slowly and say like, well, now you have to just sit and ramp
[Guest]: up the speed.
[Guest]: And if I do that, I'm going to get better because sometimes I can find like, you know,
[Guest]: the certain exercises I give the student, I practice it during the week.
[Guest]: So when we meet again, we're both like, okay, we've both practiced, okay, now let's see
[Guest]: where we are at.
[Unknown]: Well, that's, that's remarkable, like, almost like musical first principles in some way
[Unknown]: what you're talking about.
[Unknown]: Just going back to the headspace, it's not the complex stuff, it's not the scales, it's
[Unknown]: not the theory, but it's more about the vibe, the understanding.
[Unknown]: Yeah, musical first principles, like I said, it's kind of feels that way.
[Unknown]: Sorry, that was just a visceral reaction to what you just said.
[Guest]: There was one guy I remember, like, he suddenly became better when I when I told him only
[Guest]: play when you're exhaling.
[Guest]: Don't play when you inhale, because he was playing a lot.
[Guest]: He was trying to do too much.
[Guest]: And I said, Okay, now look, when you breathe, you know, there's an inhale process, you spend
[Guest]: for do that.
[Guest]: So suddenly felt like, okay, there's more like, you know, the intent in what he was
[Guest]: playing.
[Guest]: The intent is the hardest thing.
[Guest]: I mean, you can't fake it, you know.
[Guest]: And if you keep on thinking of yourself as like, I'm never going to be good, I'm never
[Guest]: going to be good.
[Guest]: Sometimes it can kind of cripple you and you'll never get there unless your part of your brain
[Guest]: says, no, I can do this.
[Guest]: Because like, there are things that I'll be able to play if I'm not thinking about it.
[Guest]: But when I think about it, there's like that critical thing that comes in, like, say, you're
[Guest]: fucking it up, you're fucking it up, you're fucking it up.
[Guest]: It automatically makes things go to shit.
[Guest]: So you have to find a way of telling that guy, shut up, be quiet, go sit in the other
[Guest]: room for two minutes.
[Guest]: Let me just do this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in cricket, there's a term called the yips in sports.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's a term called the yips where people just freeze at something that they've
[Amit Varma]: done so well before.
[Amit Varma]: I think a famous example is Jana Nowotna was playing a match in the mid 1990s, sometimes
[Amit Varma]: and she was 5-0 up in the last set and she just lost, she just froze, she couldn't do
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And the theory behind that, there's a famous Malcolm Gladwell essay on this also, the theory
[Amit Varma]: behind that is that there's stuff that we've just internalized, it's reflexive to us, we
[Amit Varma]: do it easily.
[Amit Varma]: But if you start thinking consciously about it, you're just not able to do it because
[Amit Varma]: that's a different part of the brain and it becomes a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to therefore ask you about processes, right?
[Amit Varma]: Just in terms of processes, whether it's processes in terms of practicing, you're playing and
[Amit Varma]: learning, whether it's processes in terms of songwriting, what are your processes like?
[Amit Varma]: Are there sort of hacks that have worked for you in terms of, you know, getting into flow,
[Amit Varma]: as they say, where the song just plays itself and like you mentioned, sometimes your student
[Amit Varma]: will ask you about how did you play that?
[Amit Varma]: And at the time you played it, you weren't thinking, right?
[Amit Varma]: So is it easy to get into that kind of state where you're just in the groove and things
[Amit Varma]: are happening?
[Amit Varma]: Do you have routines, processes, ways to work towards it?
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the things that you know, is common advice for writers to give is that you cannot
[Amit Varma]: wait for inspiration.
[Amit Varma]: It's all about, you know, getting your ass down on the chair and just working at it.
[Amit Varma]: It's never easy.
[Amit Varma]: It's always hard work, right?
[Amit Varma]: So and you can balance that out with that thing that, you know, sometimes you can get
[Amit Varma]: into flow when everything just happens easily, and it's just kind of happening by itself.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: For me, the sound has to be right, you know, for me to be able to loosen up because the
[Guest]: moment my guitar sound is not happening, it shuts me down like boom, and I have to just
[Guest]: struggle my way, you know, because sometimes at some gig, like the amps not functioning
[Guest]: well and everything, you know, you can only do so much.
[Guest]: So you kind of have to say, sorry, audience, I know you paid money to come and see me today,
[Guest]: but I'm just going to have to struggle through this and do the best you can.
[Guest]: And some days it's just like your, your feet are almost off the ground throughout the gig,
[Guest]: you know, like there was one gig I remember at Hard Rock Cafe in Pune.
[Guest]: It was NH7 and all the other stages shut off one by one.
[Guest]: And everyone started filtering into this gig, which was actually like one full on low public
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: But then it became like, you know, a full house and everything.
[Guest]: So that gig, it was like the moment I got on stage and I hit the first note, it didn't
[Guest]: matter.
[Guest]: There was like 10 or 20 people in there to start.
[Guest]: It just sounded so good.
[Guest]: I was like, okay, now I'm gonna have a good gig, you know, it just like you're hearing
[Guest]: everything clearly, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: Now when I'm writing it, it could, you know, sometimes I could come up with something really
[Guest]: quickly.
[Guest]: Sometimes I have to just massage it a few different ways.
[Guest]: And I don't really sit down to write a song, usually.
[Guest]: I sit down to complete a song, but that writing, that initial idea, that spark or the idea
[Guest]: that has legs, and I said, it can come anytime.
[Guest]: Sometimes you're in the bathroom and you're hearing a melody in your head.
[Guest]: I can't shut that off, by the way, if there's something playing in my head, it just goes
[Guest]: on and through while I'm sleeping at night, it's goes on and on and on.
[Guest]: And I can hear it in the dream sometimes.
[Guest]: It's so weird.
[Guest]: I'm like, you're also, it's gone, leave me alone for now, you know.
[Guest]: So and then, like, especially if it's like a, like a musical problem, you know, like
[Guest]: now you'll solve this problem and the bloody thing just keeps going, ding, ding, ding,
[Guest]: ding, ding, ding, ding in your head.
[Guest]: And you create like almost like 500 different permutations and combinations of, of what
[Guest]: it could be.
[Guest]: So that subconscious process, I still haven't, you know, come under full understanding of
[Guest]: what it does.
[Guest]: There are a few studies, you know, like one is called this is your brain on music or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: There's another guy called Anil Seth, who is a professor of consciousness.
[Guest]: And he had a TED talk, which I was watching and it found it pretty fascinating.
[Guest]: So I put his words in a song called Anesthesia, which was like, you know, the anesthesia is
[Guest]: like this, it basically shows you what is, what is consciousness, you know, that sort
[Guest]: of thing.
[Guest]: When does consciousness stop?
[Guest]: Where does it end?
[Guest]: And all that kind of thing.
[Guest]: So I find that a fascinating subject, but there's parts of my brain, which I still don't
[Guest]: understand, you know, how it works and that sort of thing.
[Guest]: I know what I like, you know.
[Guest]: So I try to set up the process, like I have a template that I've made in Cubase, like
[Guest]: everything is connected in a certain way.
[Guest]: So if I want to start writing, I can start doing that pretty quickly.
[Guest]: I can pull up a drum track.
[Guest]: I find it sometimes it works, if you're stuck, you put on a, you know, a loop or something
[Guest]: like that, that can tend to, you know, flow that.
[Guest]: And sometimes just jamming with other people, that's like the best thing for me, you know,
[Guest]: like the most creative I'm in is with other people in the room who are on the same, you
[Guest]: know, wavelength as you are musically.
[Guest]: There was one song, Focus 3, I wrote that just before I left New Zealand to come back
[Guest]: to India 2011.
[Guest]: And my friends had organized this little jam and we were playing and then we had some stimulants
[Guest]: that were part of the, you know, the evening and everything like that.
[Guest]: So there came to a point like where three of us were jamming and it sounded so good.
[Guest]: I almost felt like myself like levitate off and see us from, you know, above, it was so
[Guest]: weird.
[Guest]: I mean, obviously you're connected with the instrument and everything, but it's almost
[Guest]: like you're looking at it from like five feet higher than, like the only time that it was
[Guest]: like a tangible, you know, experience like that.
[Guest]: I don't know if the stimulants had something to do with it or whatever.
[Guest]: So the funny thing is, I remember that exactly how it went.
[Guest]: And so when I came back to India, I remember I'd done this gig with Ehsan at the Garden
[Guest]: of Five Senses in Delhi.
[Guest]: And I had to do a song of my own and Jai was playing drums and Loy was playing bass.
[Guest]: I was like, hang on, I wrote this riff, let's just, you know, see where that goes.
[Guest]: And there was a sarangi player, Suhail from Advaita, and he started singing something
[Guest]: on top of it because I think the idea was, you know, to have him to collaborate with
[Guest]: us on that song.
[Guest]: And then I think Loy shaped it a little bit differently.
[Guest]: So that whole process took a very tangible idea, which is something I'd almost completed,
[Guest]: but he shaped it in a very cool way.
[Guest]: So then, you know, I kind of wrote a little thank you to both of them for their help in
[Guest]: those melodies.
[Guest]: So that's where you kind of hear a little bit of that Indian influence and that kind
[Guest]: of thing.
[Guest]: But the collaborative thing is also like, you need to be with people who, like, there's
[Guest]: no egos and no hang ups.
[Guest]: Everyone's just there to play music and not, you know, this is what color shoes I'm wearing
[Guest]: today and what is none of that happening.
[Guest]: So that that can open up, you know, and you tend to learn what are the triggers that open
[Guest]: up those those doors, you know, it's almost like you're trying to break into another world
[Guest]: and take something from them, pull it back into us.
[Guest]: That's ideally what because many songwriters have, you know, kind of likened it to that
[Guest]: person, like Tom Petty or something, I go like way up high and I pull something back
[Guest]: down to the earth.
[Guest]: So the more you learn to do that, the better your chances of actually doing that.
[Guest]: You're not going to do it every time.
[Guest]: I mean, you watch Sachin, there's not every batch that he makes, essentially, sometimes
[Guest]: he gets out on a duck, but he's still Sachin, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like that.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give examples of these sort of triggers that you mentioned where you can, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're collaborating with a bunch of people and shit happens?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, it's all over that second album.
[Guest]: And do you want me to play you something?
[Guest]: It's kind of pretty cool.
[Guest]: Let me just see if I can find it because it's on some hard disk.
[Guest]: But this is the first time we ever played North Star together.
[Guest]: And I'd kind of put the whole thing together in terms of a basic arrangement, but I'd left
[Guest]: things open into what would happen in that middle jam section.
[Guest]: And one of the things we did in Black Star Blues when we came to that middle section
[Guest]: was to just break it down and have Adi underpin something with a bass line or whatever, and
[Guest]: then have Bevan move like, you know, chord shapes on top of it.
[Guest]: So we kind of said, okay, this is the bass line.
[Guest]: I gave it to him, like, you know that, and told Bevan, okay, this is the chords.
[Guest]: But after that, what happened is, I'll play you that middle section.
[Guest]: Okay, so this is the North Star middle section.
[Guest]: Keep in mind, no one has any idea what's going to happen now.
[Unknown]: Keep in mind.
[Unknown]:
[Guest]: So what you hear is pretty much what went down on record
[Guest]: because I thought, like, that's a pretty good solo.
[Guest]: So I went back and I learned it.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: I learned how to play the improv thing
[Guest]: and we put it down on the album.
[Guest]: So that's kind of like, there's no ideas,
[Guest]: like the sense of, like, abandon, you know,
[Guest]: which was captured luckily.
[Guest]: And obviously now I was able to go back
[Guest]: and change a few things which I felt on retrospect,
[Guest]: you know, that could be changed, that could be better.
[Guest]: But on the whole, the entire flow of that whole sequence
[Guest]: is what happened.
[Guest]: And that's what we tried to recreate on the album.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's superb.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one of the things sort of Chuck told me about you
[Amit Varma]: is that from sort of being the brash, young upstart
[Amit Varma]: in the late 90s, you are now like a senior citizen
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian rock scene and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Budda uncle.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was trying to be polite there.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me, how has the scene kind of evolved
[Amit Varma]: over all of this time?
[Amit Varma]: Because whenever a new ecosystem emerges,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, in that period of time in the 90s,
[Amit Varma]: ending at perhaps when Zero came around,
[Amit Varma]: I was writing a lot for the Rock Street Journal
[Amit Varma]: and I was into the scene.
[Amit Varma]: And it seemed at that time that our bands
[Amit Varma]: aren't really quite there yet.
[Amit Varma]: Some stuff is derivative.
[Amit Varma]: It's not that deep.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously the way ecosystems evolve
[Amit Varma]: is over a period of time as more and more people
[Amit Varma]: come into it, as time passes, it gets deeper.
[Amit Varma]: Just the overall quality gets better.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I kind of tuned out of the indie scene
[Amit Varma]: around the time Hook came out.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember at that time listening to that album
[Amit Varma]: and thinking it is, and that's what I was telling Chuck
[Amit Varma]: in the morning today, that it's just so much tighter
[Amit Varma]: and crisper than a lot of the other stuff
[Amit Varma]: that is coming out.
[Amit Varma]: And absolutely no disrespect intended to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: any of the other bands around that period.
[Amit Varma]: So fill me into how that scene kind of evolved
[Amit Varma]: because at the same time, the times are changing, right?
[Amit Varma]: Things are opening up, the internet is exploding.
[Amit Varma]: Where's sort of, is there like,
[Amit Varma]: is there one thing you can call as an indie rock scene today
[Amit Varma]: or is it just different things happening
[Amit Varma]: all over the place?
[Amit Varma]: For me and those of my listeners
[Amit Varma]: who may not really have followed this,
[Amit Varma]: just kind of fill me into what's happened.
[Amit Varma]: What are the parts of it which kind of fill you
[Amit Varma]: with happiness when you look at it and you say,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, you know, things happen just right.
[Amit Varma]: And where do you kind of feel disappointed
[Amit Varma]: or let down and so on?
[Guest]: Well, I've seen it like transition at least three or four,
[Guest]: maybe five or six times.
[Guest]: So like when I was just getting into playing music,
[Guest]: I think probably the biggest band in the country
[Guest]: at the time was Indus Creed.
[Guest]: Now we had Star TV and we could see their videos on Star TV.
[Guest]: So in terms of that reach,
[Guest]: I don't think it's ever been as good since then.
[Guest]: Then you had bands like Pentagram putting out albums
[Guest]: of original music, which kind of inspired us to do the same.
[Guest]: Now when we put out that first album,
[Guest]: which we recorded in a balcony on a computer,
[Guest]: which was to keep overheating,
[Guest]: just getting into the technology
[Guest]: where we were able to do it ourselves.
[Guest]: That was the whole thing.
[Guest]: We had creative control and for whatever reason,
[Guest]: you could put the blame squarely on us for how that sounds.
[Guest]: But at least it was ours.
[Guest]: We were like in total control.
[Guest]: There was no one paying us money and saying,
[Guest]: we want this, we want that.
[Guest]: Nothing of that was part of the process.
[Guest]: So there's always been artists in any country
[Guest]: that are still doing that
[Guest]: and were able to do it at that time.
[Guest]: If your dad owned a studio, for example,
[Guest]: then you could do that thing in the 80s.
[Guest]: The technology became a bit more democratic.
[Guest]: Now the downside to that is now everyone can do it.
[Guest]: So where do you put a distinction
[Guest]: in between a bona fide artist and some guy
[Guest]: who's just playing around in a garage band
[Guest]: and came up with some groove that he liked,
[Guest]: put on some other loop and put some vibes.
[Guest]: The moment that loop-based thing started happening,
[Guest]: I noticed it became like,
[Guest]: now it's not just the realm of musicians.
[Guest]: Now anyone with some taste and hopefully some taste
[Guest]: and some technology can put the two together
[Guest]: and come up with something.
[Guest]: And once people start liking that,
[Guest]: the thing is, as long as there are people to listen to it,
[Guest]: you can't say that it's not legit or whatever.
[Guest]: As long as there are people listening to it
[Guest]: and having an honest reaction,
[Guest]: I think that's, for me, the parameters of legit.
[Guest]: Whatever it is.
[Guest]: You can have spoken word over some concert piano.
[Guest]: Someone digs it, great.
[Guest]: Who's to say this is good?
[Guest]: For example, like a kid.
[Guest]: My daughter, she listens to stuff.
[Guest]: She doesn't have those parameters
[Guest]: about this is good, this is bad.
[Guest]: You either like it or you don't like it.
[Guest]: So that's as honest a reaction as you're going to get.
[Guest]: So there'll always be that,
[Guest]: whatever music is coming out.
[Guest]: In terms of the scene itself, how it grows.
[Guest]: When I was in New Zealand, initially from 2004,
[Guest]: I think that time was the biggest boom.
[Guest]: I felt like I missed out on a bit of that.
[Guest]: And when I came back in 2009,
[Guest]: I kind of caught the last bit of it.
[Guest]: So down to the first N87 festival to 2010 or 2011.
[Unknown]: I don't know.
[Unknown]: 2010.
[Unknown]: 2010, yeah.
[Guest]: So that was a totally cool vibe
[Guest]: and it was no big, huge thing
[Guest]: which everyone and their friend came along to.
[Guest]: It was just basically artists and people
[Guest]: who knew that this was happening,
[Guest]: landed up in Pune and it was a beautiful time.
[Guest]: So the first couple of years,
[Guest]: then it started getting bigger and bigger.
[Guest]: And then with every scene,
[Guest]: there'll be one upwards trajectory
[Guest]: and then there's one downwards trajectory.
[Guest]: And again, something else will come along and take that.
[Guest]: And that's the whole thing about indie versus Bollywood.
[Guest]: Now, the moment anything becomes big,
[Guest]: Bollywood absorbs it and pulls it in
[Guest]: because Bollywood has money
[Guest]: and Bollywood can get whatever it wants.
[Guest]: You're not going to say like,
[Guest]: no, don't pay me too close to make this song.
[Guest]: Pay me that money.
[Guest]: I'll do whatever you want.
[Guest]: You'll take it at least somewhat financially secure
[Guest]: and then you do what you want to apart from that.
[Guest]: So I guess the whole idea is like,
[Guest]: still now, the biggest songwriters in India
[Guest]: still don't get to control their own music.
[Guest]: I think that's the saddest part.
[Guest]: I know music directors
[Guest]: who didn't get permission to play their own songs.
[Guest]: Can you believe that?
[Guest]: For me, that was like a travesty of justice.
[Guest]: Why do you...
[Guest]: Because some other company owned it
[Guest]: and you know how the things get in the industry.
[Guest]: It's not as rosy as it seems.
[Guest]: People who control the money,
[Guest]: they want to obviously control their investment
[Guest]: and they'll do whatever they have to do
[Guest]: to make sure that they retain that power.
[Guest]: So until I guess, you know,
[Guest]: mainstream artists are able to...
[Guest]: I mean, you look at India,
[Guest]: it's kind of an anomaly in a sense
[Guest]: because I think no other country does film music
[Guest]: take such a dominant part of the mainstream music culture.
[Guest]: It's like we have fed music with images
[Guest]: from a time immemorial,
[Guest]: since, you know, 60s or whatever.
[Guest]: So like we had MTE before there was MTE in India.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: it's always going to have some kind of a thing.
[Guest]: And then now as the mainstream changes,
[Guest]: like saying from Bollywood to now Netflix
[Guest]: and all that is coming out,
[Guest]: then there's like, oh, this also exists.
[Guest]: And then the lines start blurring, you know,
[Guest]: between Indie and mainstream.
[Guest]: So many of the artists that you would classify as Indie artists
[Guest]: have got links.
[Guest]: I mean, even down to me having played on,
[Guest]: you know, heaps of Bollywood songs.
[Guest]: You know, and for me, initially,
[Guest]: it was like a bit of like, you know,
[Guest]: I only want to play on good music.
[Guest]: I don't want to play on shit.
[Guest]: But then it became like, you know,
[Guest]: let's bring the best that we can
[Guest]: to whatever it is that we are given today.
[Guest]: It became like a challenge.
[Guest]: You know, what can you do with this?
[Guest]: What can you turn it into?
[Guest]: So that is what I got off on.
[Guest]: So as long as, you know, there was that,
[Guest]: I still found it challenging.
[Guest]: Like you never knew what you were going to get,
[Guest]: you know, in that sense.
[Guest]: And then you suddenly like,
[Guest]: okay, come up with a killer hook now, right now.
[Guest]: What do you do?
[Guest]: You know, it's like,
[Guest]: you either have the goods or you don't.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it was like,
[Guest]: it still kind of separated the, you know,
[Guest]: the men from the boys, as it were.
[Guest]: So like, there's still killer musicianship in Bollywood.
[Guest]: Like you see some of those Indian classical guys do.
[Guest]: Like, there's like not,
[Guest]: I live to live five lifetimes for me
[Guest]: to get that good and how they go.
[Guest]: And they just close their eyes and they do it,
[Guest]: you know, just like, you know.
[Guest]: Because there's years and years and years of practice
[Guest]: which has to go into that tradition for them
[Guest]: to be able to even consider a good musician.
[Guest]: You know, it's like you pick up a guitar
[Guest]: and you learn three chords and,
[Guest]: bro, I've written my own song, you know.
[Guest]: So it's a different world in that sense.
[Guest]: But I've always had respect for good musicianship
[Guest]: in any genre.
[Guest]: You know, you can always sense that,
[Guest]: okay, this guy is a motherfucker at what he does.
[Guest]: You know, there's like a jazz saying,
[Guest]: like the best guys are called that.
[Guest]: So it's like,
[Guest]: you have to have respect for that sort of thing
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Guest]: You know, the lines will, you know,
[Guest]: keep blurring
[Guest]: because that cross-pollination will keep happening.
[Guest]: And who's basically controlling the money
[Guest]: will ultimately control what's going in the mainstream.
[Guest]: You know, it just depends.
[Guest]: I mean, Netflix has got a budget.
[Guest]: Bro, there you go.
[Guest]: Bollywood's got a budget.
[Guest]: It's just like, who's going to pay me to do this?
[Unknown]: That was fascinating.
[Unknown]: I mean, I know you have a question, Amit,
[Unknown]: but I just wanted to close that out with an observation.
[Unknown]: I think, Warren, you're the only person I know
[Unknown]: who's actually played at each stage at NH7 Weekender.
[Unknown]: The rock and metal stage, the alternative stage,
[Unknown]: the folk stage, obviously,
[Unknown]: and also the electronic stage.
[Unknown]: I think I've seen you once.
[Guest]: No, there's two other people who have done it.
[Guest]: There's Sid Couto and Sid Busserud.
[Guest]: Both the Sids.
[Unknown]: Fair enough.
[Unknown]: All right, fair enough.
[Unknown]: The first then.
[Unknown]: Let's call it the first.
[Unknown]: Sorry, that is just an observation
[Unknown]: I wanted to get out of the way.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, and that's a kind of a telling observation.
[Amit Varma]: So when you kind of look ahead,
[Amit Varma]: like what you've done over the last 10, 15 years
[Amit Varma]: is you've done work that pays the bills, right?
[Amit Varma]: Sessions work, your Bollywood work, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: It pays the bills.
[Amit Varma]: You got to do it.
[Amit Varma]: That's an imperative.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, you've done the stuff that you love.
[Amit Varma]: How do you see things going forward?
[Amit Varma]: Is that also drudgery?
[Amit Varma]: Because it is also music.
[Amit Varma]: So is that also drudgery?
[Amit Varma]: Or with what kind of attitude
[Amit Varma]: or approach do you go into it?
[Amit Varma]: You know, is some of that also work that you're proud of?
[Amit Varma]: Or it's just something that you do to pay the bills
[Guest]: and you got to do what you got to do?
[Guest]: My attitude is very simple.
[Guest]: I get paid to play guitar, and that's a blessing.
[Guest]: I will never discount that enough.
[Guest]: As long as I'm playing guitar,
[Guest]: it doesn't really matter in that sense.
[Guest]: You have to always come back to it.
[Guest]: Because even on gigs, which I wasn't really enjoying,
[Guest]: there were things that I would appreciate.
[Guest]: Like the other musicians, you would have a hang after the gig.
[Guest]: You may make connections, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: Then sometimes the shared misery brings you together.
[Guest]: So that happens as well.
[Guest]: In fact, the thing which I did not really like
[Guest]: about the whole commercial thing was mainly
[Guest]: the whole drudgery of traveling and the early morning flights.
[Guest]: It was brutal.
[Guest]: I mean, every musician has to deal with it.
[Guest]: So I'm the last person to complain.
[Guest]: But it can take a toll on your system.
[Guest]: I don't know how people can actually do tours
[Guest]: for months and months without going home.
[Guest]: We were banging out maximum three gigs on the weekend.
[Guest]: When we would come home to family,
[Guest]: at least on a Monday, Tuesday,
[Guest]: we would see their faces before we took off again.
[Guest]: But that whole thing about being away from home
[Guest]: for a very long time, man,
[Guest]: I have the ultimate respect for people who actually do that.
[Guest]: And now with this virus thing,
[Guest]: the whole life thing again is up in air.
[Guest]: Because the moment things start opening,
[Guest]: then something else happens,
[Guest]: and then everything's closed again.
[Guest]: Same thing happened in New Zealand.
[Guest]: The biggest artists, they had a nice run till Jan.
[Guest]: And then that Omicron thing happened,
[Guest]: and everything is shut.
[Guest]: Also, being a musician,
[Guest]: you have to keep in mind
[Guest]: that a lot of your income was seasonal.
[Guest]: There'll be times of the year
[Guest]: where you would make a lot of money,
[Guest]: and then there were times of the year
[Guest]: where nothing would come.
[Guest]: So then you have to keep in mind
[Guest]: that all that money that I've stashed up from that
[Guest]: is going to cover you for the rest of the year,
[Guest]: all that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So you just have to be adaptable, man.
[Guest]: Now I'm kind of putting my energy
[Guest]: into at least doing a YouTube thing
[Guest]: and seeing what happens there.
[Guest]: Just do as many different things as possible.
[Guest]: Because for a long time,
[Guest]: it was just like I focused all my energy on Instagram.
[Guest]: And then I was like,
[Guest]: no, I can't really do only that.
[Guest]: With this whole metaverse looming and everything,
[Guest]: I don't really know how long I'm going to be on Instagram.
[Guest]: Maybe things will change in five years or whatever.
[Guest]: Remember, what was that thing that used to be there?
[Guest]: Orkut.
[Guest]: And before that, there was some MySpace.
[Guest]: Man, there were so many musicians
[Guest]: who invested a lot of time in MySpace.
[Guest]: And then when MySpace went bust,
[Guest]: they kind of got disillusioned,
[Guest]: and then they said bye to social media.
[Guest]: So now, I don't know if I should make a TikTok.
[Guest]: In fact, I have made a TikTok account,
[Guest]: but I think I posted only one video.
[Guest]: I'm still learning about this algorithm and everything,
[Guest]: like how it works,
[Guest]: and post at certain times of the day and all that shit.
[Guest]: And sometimes I just want to say,
[Guest]: F it, you take it, you listen to it.
[Guest]: Now, my job is over.
[Guest]: Your job has begun.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I've actually been enjoying your Instagram account
[Amit Varma]: in the sense of,
[Amit Varma]: it's just these little nuggets of happiness
[Amit Varma]: that just keep coming when you play all these covers.
[Guest]: I really enjoy that.
[Guest]: I try to keep those live things now
[Guest]: just as a temporary thing,
[Guest]: because then I can...
[Guest]: Early on, they used to save the chat.
[Guest]: And I don't know if you've been on any of the Instagram live things.
[Guest]: Sometimes there's some weird things that are in the chat,
[Guest]: which I react to.
[Guest]: And when that's taken away,
[Guest]: you just think I'm talking rubbish.
[Guest]: What's this guy on about?
[Guest]: So I tend not to save them anymore.
[Guest]: I think a couple of good ones are saved
[Guest]: just to see what it was like.
[Guest]: But apart from that,
[Guest]: I don't really have a fixed time where I jump on it,
[Guest]: because I know I could have a wider reach if I did that.
[Guest]: But to me, it kind of feels more authentic if I just...
[Guest]: I'm feeling it sometimes.
[Guest]: I just feel like playing.
[Guest]: I feel like seeing,
[Guest]: okay, what do you want me to play?
[Guest]: Okay, I'll play that.
[Guest]: And sometimes I don't want to play requests.
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: shut up and just let me do what I want to do right now.
[Guest]: So it's kind of hard to say that
[Guest]: without being deemed arrogant or impolite.
[Guest]: But sometimes I have a better idea
[Guest]: of what would be good to play right now.
[Guest]: So just leave it to the DJ.
[Guest]: You know, I'm the DJ right now.
[Guest]: So let me do it.
[Guest]: And sometimes I'm totally open, man.
[Guest]: What do you want me to play?
[Guest]: You want me to play some bapsa?
[Guest]: Okay, here you go.
[Guest]: Because it just depends what mood you're in.
[Guest]: So it's kind of cool that way.
[Guest]: And in terms of posting regular stuff,
[Guest]: again, it's something I'm horrible at.
[Guest]: I don't really have scheduled posts or anything like that.
[Guest]: If I'm feeling up to it,
[Guest]: I try to remain as authentic as possible to myself.
[Guest]: The moment that goes away,
[Guest]: then for me, it becomes like,
[Unknown]: why am I doing this?
[Unknown]: No, 100%.
[Unknown]: I was about to just put that word in.
[Unknown]: I think the coolest thing about your account
[Unknown]: is the authenticity.
[Unknown]: The fact that it's not planned.
[Unknown]: It's like you don't have scheduled stuff that happens.
[Unknown]: You know that this stuff is going to happen.
[Unknown]: You'll do a live once in a while.
[Unknown]: You'll do this.
[Unknown]: You'll do that.
[Unknown]: And it just makes it feel more human.
[Guest]: I feel guilty promoting my own gigs on Instagram.
[Unknown]: And that's as authentic as it gets.
[Guest]: Putting more than one post about a gig.
[Guest]: I was like, I posted it.
[Guest]: I don't want to keep talking about the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something.
[Amit Varma]: When we are young, for most people,
[Amit Varma]: when we are young, we have goals.
[Amit Varma]: I want to do this.
[Amit Varma]: I want to do that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: As you grow older, you realize that those goals are pointless.
[Amit Varma]: They keep evolving anyway.
[Amit Varma]: Many of them don't happen.
[Amit Varma]: Many of your dreams are not going to come true.
[Amit Varma]: You kind of figure it out.
[Amit Varma]: And you figure out that the path to both excellence and happiness
[Amit Varma]: lies not in achieving goals, but in just setting up processes.
[Amit Varma]: Living your life in ways that make you happy.
[Amit Varma]: Taking happiness in those small joys.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you wake up in the morning and
[Amit Varma]: I assume for you, if you wake up in the morning
[Amit Varma]: and you know you're just going to play around with your guitar
[Amit Varma]: and record something and blah blah.
[Amit Varma]: You're already feeling happy at the start of the day
[Amit Varma]: because that's what you want to do.
[Amit Varma]: The goal may not matter.
[Amit Varma]: So has there been a similar sort of evolution
[Amit Varma]: with the way that you look at life,
[Amit Varma]: especially with parenthood and all?
[Amit Varma]: Because I guess being a father then must make you
[Amit Varma]: take that step back.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when you were young,
[Amit Varma]: were there goals like, hey, I want to be, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a world-famous guitarist or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Zero will be this big band or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And where you are today, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what do you think of as making you happy
[Amit Varma]: over the next 5 years, 10 years, 15 years?
[Amit Varma]: Is it just doing the stuff that you love
[Amit Varma]: without thinking about what comes out of it?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it that, no, there are these things
[Amit Varma]: that I also want to kind of figure out?
[Guest]: I'll tell you about like goals when I was much younger,
[Guest]: like around the time I was 17 or 18.
[Guest]: I wanted to play Rang Bhavan.
[Guest]: I wanted to get stoned with my friends.
[Guest]: And I wanted to have a girlfriend.
[Guest]: So by the time I was 18,
[Guest]: all those three things had been accomplished.
[Guest]: So I was, you know, onto a good streak there.
[Guest]: Then things started happening with the band and everything.
[Guest]: And, you know, like after Rang Bhavan was the next thing,
[Guest]: like I said, we did the great Indian rock thing.
[Guest]: But by the time I think I reached around 30 or so,
[Guest]: then I figured, you know,
[Guest]: actually the whole process of, I mean,
[Guest]: the whole journey is as important,
[Guest]: if not more important than the goals you achieve.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I've never really been
[Guest]: the most ambitious person, you know,
[Guest]: like I want to play Madison Square Garden.
[Guest]: I was pretty, like, realistic.
[Guest]: Like, Rang Bhavan's a good, you know,
[Guest]: and Rang Bhavan is as good as Madison Square Garden
[Guest]: for me personally.
[Guest]: Like, that venue's got, like, plenty of history
[Guest]: and vibe and everything like that.
[Guest]: You know, so in terms of, like,
[Guest]: also having a music accepted,
[Guest]: how many listeners is enough, you know?
[Guest]: Once you get to a point, like,
[Guest]: if you get to a point where your Spotify streams,
[Guest]: I mean, your streaming payments can support your lifestyle,
[Guest]: that's great, you know,
[Guest]: but you need so many of those,
[Guest]: which means making totally different choices,
[Guest]: which, you know, for whatever reason
[Guest]: is not something I want to do right now.
[Guest]: If for whatever reason suddenly it becomes popular,
[Guest]: I'm not going to, like, say, hey,
[Guest]: no, keep it only to, like, you know,
[Guest]: hardcore listeners.
[Unknown]: Who wants to listen to it?
[Guest]: Let them listen to it.
[Guest]: So in that sense of, like, numbers and everything,
[Guest]: I've never been able to play that game
[Guest]: without having a bit of a laugh
[Guest]: about, you know, how ridiculous the whole thing is.
[Guest]: I mean, what really matters at the end of the day?
[Guest]: You know, like, just genuine enjoyment from the music
[Guest]: and while making it and while listening to it.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, if you can reduce it down,
[Guest]: I've always been that, like,
[Guest]: let's reduce it to, like,
[Guest]: the simplest thing that it could be
[Guest]: and find some enjoyment in that,
[Guest]: and then, you know,
[Guest]: the other things tend to take care of themselves.
[Guest]: So in terms of goals,
[Guest]: I guess, like, just, you know,
[Guest]: keeping a roof over the family's head is, like,
[Guest]: you know, the main thing right now.
[Guest]: And if we can, you know,
[Guest]: make some good music while doing that,
[Guest]: then that's, you know,
[Guest]: you want to keep us alive in the creative
[Guest]: and spiritual sense.
[Guest]: And also, like,
[Guest]: finding as many different kinds of music to appreciate,
[Guest]: you know, because life is short.
[Guest]: You're never going to get to the bottom of it.
[Guest]: You're never going to find the magic cord
[Guest]: or, you know, whatever it is.
[Guest]: So I just like finding pieces.
[Guest]: The thing is, when I find music
[Guest]: that I don't know how it's done,
[Guest]: where I don't know the formula,
[Guest]: I don't know the magic trick behind it,
[Guest]: I appreciate that more
[Guest]: because then it becomes, like,
[Guest]: a very, like, you know,
[Guest]: I just enjoy it for its sake.
[Guest]: The moment I know,
[Guest]: okay, this is the formula,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: this is, like, you know,
[Guest]: leave it for someone else to enjoy this.
[Guest]: But there's still, like,
[Guest]: a lot of pop music I still love,
[Guest]: like Def Leppard or White Snake.
[Guest]: And you can, like,
[Guest]: you can read the producers telling you,
[Guest]: okay, this is why we, you know,
[Guest]: made so-and-so creative decision,
[Guest]: which is not exactly the most musical one or whatever.
[Guest]: It still works, you know,
[Guest]: because that's something I guess you enjoy
[Guest]: when you were younger
[Guest]: and you didn't have those, you know,
[Guest]: judgmental, you know, faculties about you.
[Guest]: So, you know, again,
[Unknown]: who's to say what is real?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: The realest you can get is
[Guest]: when you're able to put in something
[Guest]: that is honest
[Guest]: and the listener is able to perceive
[Guest]: that honesty and that authenticity
[Guest]: or whatever you want to call it.
[Guest]: For me, then, at least,
[Guest]: that's the first thing taken care of, you know.
[Guest]: Then you see later, like,
[Guest]: where we're going to play,
[Guest]: what kind of gigs we're going to do,
[Guest]: what's the backstage rider,
[Guest]: like all that will come later.
[Guest]: Another guy who I've always appreciated
[Guest]: for who, you know,
[Guest]: is able to do that as well as Taj,
[Guest]: Tajdar Junaid.
[Guest]: He's always done exactly what he wanted to do
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Guest]: you can sense that in his music.
[Guest]: So, like, another,
[Guest]: it's almost like we've had, like,
[Guest]: parallel careers.
[Guest]: And now one of the things he's done,
[Guest]: went in for an Oscar nomination,
[Guest]: which is damn amazing, you know,
[Guest]: like super happy for him right now.
[Amit Varma]: I was just listening to his track,
[Amit Varma]: Color is Your Raindrop yesterday,
[Amit Varma]: beautiful track.
[Amit Varma]: And somehow it reminded me of a similar vibe
[Amit Varma]: to Ode to a Sunny Day.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I just kind of heard them back to back
[Amit Varma]: and it just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: both of them are just so soothing
[Amit Varma]: and so kind of wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: And when I was watching his video for Dastan,
[Amit Varma]: somebody left an interesting comment.
[Amit Varma]: They said that every time they reach to 15,
[Amit Varma]: two minutes, 15 seconds in the song,
[Amit Varma]: they start crying.
[Amit Varma]: And then below that,
[Amit Varma]: someone else left a comment saying that,
[Amit Varma]: why do you start crying?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it's just a song.
[Amit Varma]: And then somebody else came and said that,
[Amit Varma]: no, it's not a song, it's a story, right?
[Amit Varma]: And every time I reached that part of the story,
[Amit Varma]: I know what's coming,
[Amit Varma]: but I can't help myself.
[Amit Varma]: And I just thought that that is
[Amit Varma]: such a beautiful sentiment.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes if you listen to music
[Amit Varma]: and I have to keep reminding myself
[Amit Varma]: to be more mindful in all the things I do,
[Amit Varma]: not just music,
[Amit Varma]: but sometimes when you listen to music like that,
[Amit Varma]: that magical thing can happen
[Amit Varma]: where you feel you're going on a journey
[Amit Varma]: through the song and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So when you sort of write your music,
[Amit Varma]: do you also feel that,
[Amit Varma]: sure, there are no vocals,
[Amit Varma]: you're just building a soundscape,
[Amit Varma]: you're playing your guitar,
[Amit Varma]: you're doing your thing,
[Amit Varma]: but there is a story,
[Amit Varma]: there is a progression.
[Amit Varma]: Do you also feel that?
[Amit Varma]: Does your own music move you sometimes?
[Guest]: Yeah, it has to actually,
[Guest]: at some point in the process.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know, it gets scrapped.
[Guest]: At some point,
[Guest]: I have to get like the chills.
[Guest]: I mean, it won't happen again
[Guest]: and every single time I listen to it.
[Guest]: But I mean, at one point,
[Guest]: like ode to a sunny day was my music
[Guest]: that I listened to to fall asleep,
[Guest]: you know, for like a good month
[Guest]: or a couple of months.
[Guest]: I just put it on every night while going to sleep.
[Guest]: Otherwise, like my head was full of too much stuff
[Guest]: that, you know, kept you awake.
[Guest]: So that was the thing that kind of, you know,
[Guest]: soothed those beasts in your head
[Guest]: and say, okay, it's okay, now go to sleep.
[Guest]: So if it has that effect on you,
[Guest]: like I said, it's a good chance
[Guest]: it'll have that effect on someone else.
[Guest]: And there's also things like sometimes
[Guest]: you take for granted that you do it
[Guest]: and it just happens.
[Guest]: And then someone else will say,
[Guest]: oh, wow, that's amazing.
[Guest]: I was like, oh, you like that?
[Guest]: And there's sometimes like where you think like,
[Guest]: wow, how clever I am, you know,
[Guest]: and no one gets it.
[Guest]: You know, it just flies over everyone else.
[Guest]: And then like not one person
[Guest]: will bring it up or whatever.
[Guest]: So there's been a few of those,
[Guest]: but you never know,
[Guest]: maybe like 20 years later,
[Guest]: someone will say, hey, what about,
[Guest]: you know, that little thing?
[Guest]: Like on the zero sounds,
[Guest]: I'll be like, yeah, someone finally got it.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, as we wrap up
[Amit Varma]: a couple of final questions,
[Amit Varma]: and one is if there are young musicians
[Amit Varma]: listening to this,
[Amit Varma]: and obviously it's challenging in India
[Amit Varma]: or anywhere, I guess,
[Amit Varma]: to be a young musician
[Amit Varma]: because you don't know
[Amit Varma]: where the money is going to come from.
[Amit Varma]: You've always got to sort of
[Amit Varma]: find that fine balance
[Amit Varma]: between doing what you love
[Amit Varma]: and just having to make a living, right?
[Amit Varma]: And what advice would you give them?
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, in a general broad sense,
[Amit Varma]: not just career advice
[Amit Varma]: in terms of making money or making music,
[Amit Varma]: but even learning music,
[Amit Varma]: appreciating music.
[Amit Varma]: Like if you were to meet,
[Amit Varma]: say the 18 year old
[Amit Varma]: or the 17 year old
[Amit Varma]: before your three goals come true,
[Amit Varma]: if you were to meet
[Amit Varma]: the 17 year old Warren today,
[Amit Varma]: what advice would you give him?
[Guest]: In fact, I just put out a video today
[Guest]: saying like 10 things I wish I had.
[Guest]: We'll link it from the show notes.
[Guest]: Some of it is a bit technical
[Guest]: because like there were musical discoveries
[Guest]: that happened like much later,
[Guest]: which I wish had been communicated to me.
[Guest]: Somebody should have told me that.
[Guest]: Generally, I would say
[Guest]: keep your enjoyment of music sacrosanct.
[Guest]: Never get to a point
[Guest]: where it just becomes a drudgery
[Guest]: because then you've got to check out
[Guest]: at that point
[Guest]: and do something else for a while
[Guest]: and then maybe come back to it.
[Guest]: So if it gets to that point,
[Guest]: you're doing something wrong.
[Guest]: Try to play with
[Guest]: as many good musicians
[Guest]: you can as possible.
[Guest]: Like I think like my best growth spot
[Guest]: as a musician happened at this time
[Guest]: when I was playing with Cole
[Guest]: and a couple of his friends
[Guest]: in this covers band every Friday night.
[Guest]: And it's brutal.
[Guest]: I mean, you go through that process
[Guest]: of just playing like what's popular
[Guest]: at that point of time,
[Guest]: but you try to do it in a way
[Guest]: which like you yourself are feeling it.
[Guest]: Otherwise, people are not going to
[Guest]: react on that.
[Guest]: So when you're the worst guy in a band,
[Guest]: that's probably like the best position
[Guest]: you can be in.
[Guest]: If you think you're like
[Guest]: the shit hot guy in the band,
[Guest]: leave the band, right?
[Guest]: Then find some better guys to play with.
[Guest]: I mean, it sounds easier said than done,
[Guest]: but you kind of have to
[Guest]: get to that process.
[Guest]: And I mean, keep an eye on the money.
[Guest]: You may know where your bills
[Guest]: are being paid and stuff like that.
[Guest]: Don't be that, you know,
[Guest]: I'm only going to do it
[Guest]: for art's sake and everything.
[Guest]: You have to obviously make sure
[Guest]: your financial things are met.
[Guest]: But you can always find a balance.
[Guest]: Finding a balance sometimes is tricky,
[Guest]: but that's what I've been doing.
[Guest]: I've just been juggling both ends
[Guest]: of the thing, trying to keep afloat.
[Guest]: Don't really focus only on one
[Guest]: genre of music.
[Guest]: Try to steal from as many different
[Guest]: people as you can,
[Guest]: because then no one will know you're stealing.
[Guest]: If you steal from one person,
[Guest]: everyone's going to notice,
[Guest]: that's where you got all your shit from.
[Guest]: So take a little bit, little bit, little bit,
[Guest]: then no one will really notice
[Guest]: where you got your stuff from.
[Guest]: And the thing is to kind of
[Guest]: develop a certain amount of confidence
[Guest]: in what you do.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it's never going to
[Guest]: get past that point.
[Guest]: If you're always second-guessing yourself,
[Guest]: you're never going to get to a point,
[Guest]: like I bet all your favorite artists
[Guest]: had some amount of confidence
[Guest]: in what they were doing,
[Guest]: which enabled them to just put it out,
[Guest]: you know, and do whatever it is
[Guest]: that they're doing.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: Just an observation on this.
[Unknown]: To me, in many ways,
[Unknown]: it's kind of surreal being part
[Unknown]: of this recording as,
[Unknown]: you know, a fan of your music for so long.
[Unknown]: This, and this might seem kind of cheesy,
[Unknown]: but this entire recording itself
[Unknown]: felt like a Blackstripe Blues song
[Unknown]: in much the same way
[Unknown]: that you read out that quote
[Unknown]: of my own that I wrote.
[Unknown]: It started off with the nice punchy bits,
[Unknown]: and then it moved into
[Unknown]: a slightly poignant part.
[Unknown]: And then towards the end,
[Unknown]: there was the emotional guitar solo
[Unknown]: when you were talking about all this.
[Unknown]: And now it's ending on the crescendo again.
[Unknown]: So I know it's a cheesy way
[Unknown]: of tying it all back in,
[Unknown]: but that to me is the observation
[Unknown]: of this entire conversation itself.
[Unknown]: And it was like a perfect
[Unknown]: Blackstripe Blues interview in some sense.
[Unknown]: So yeah, that's the observation that I have.
[Unknown]: It's not really a question.
[Unknown]: I don't have anything else to ask on this.
[Unknown]: As long as it works.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, to compare a session I've done
[Amit Varma]: with a Blackstripe Blues song
[Amit Varma]: is a great compliment,
[Amit Varma]: but I'll take time to process
[Amit Varma]: exactly what you meant.
[Amit Varma]: But since you want to end on a crescendo,
[Amit Varma]: we can end on a crescendo
[Amit Varma]: because this is often the favorite part
[Amit Varma]: of the show for many people,
[Amit Varma]: which is in general,
[Amit Varma]: I ask my guests to recommend books
[Amit Varma]: or films or music,
[Amit Varma]: which they absolutely love
[Amit Varma]: and they want to share with the world.
[Amit Varma]: In your case,
[Amit Varma]: I guess it'll mainly be music,
[Amit Varma]: but whatever else you want to recommend.
[Amit Varma]: But in the sense,
[Amit Varma]: stuff that you're so excited about
[Amit Varma]: that you want to stand on a soapbox
[Amit Varma]: and shout at the world,
[Amit Varma]: Hey, listen to this.
[Amit Varma]: This is amazing.
[Guest]: I mean, I guess everyone's seen Spinal Tap.
[Guest]: If you haven't, please check it out.
[Guest]: That's like one of my favorite films.
[Guest]: All the Monty Python stuff I love,
[Guest]: especially I think people these days
[Guest]: who have problems with religion
[Guest]: should watch Life of Brian
[Guest]: and kind of figure out
[Guest]: why this whole belief
[Guest]: it's almost like a germ,
[Guest]: you know, how it tends to propagate.
[Guest]: So do check that out.
[Guest]: The other things I'm interested in,
[Guest]: what like cooking and stuff like that.
[Guest]: There's this nice account I found on Instagram
[Guest]: called Masala Lab.
[Guest]: So he actually talks about the science
[Guest]: of Indian cooking,
[Amit Varma]: which I find.
[Amit Varma]: He's been on my show,
[Amit Varma]: Krish Ashok.
[Amit Varma]: We had a three-hour episode
[Amit Varma]: and he's a fine musician,
[Amit Varma]: by the way,
[Amit Varma]: you should check out some of his music.
[Amit Varma]: He does incredible,
[Amit Varma]: like he'll take a famous Western song
[Amit Varma]: or a piece of opera
[Amit Varma]: and convert it to Carnatic
[Amit Varma]: and he'll do his things with it.
[Amit Varma]: So I think you'll love him.
[Guest]: Yeah, you should check him out.
[Guest]: I will check out his music.
[Guest]: There's an account on YouTube
[Guest]: I found called Bill McClintock
[Guest]: who does some amazing mashups
[Guest]: like his specialities,
[Guest]: taking like 80s metal
[Guest]: and mashing it up with 70s R&B,
[Guest]: which, you know, you'll find some.
[Guest]: There's one with Aerosmith,
[Guest]: Sweet Emotion and Aretha Franklin,
[Guest]: which is like amazing.
[Guest]: It kind of gave me a little
[Guest]: of the goosebumps
[Guest]: when Aretha kicked into the chorus,
[Guest]: which, you know,
[Guest]: you get in any case.
[Guest]: If you haven't heard Derek Trucks,
[Guest]: please check him out.
[Guest]: If you haven't heard Michael Landau,
[Guest]: He's like if Hendrix learned
[Guest]: a bit more jazz
[Guest]: and kind of got like
[Guest]: a more polished guitar sound.
[Guest]: If you haven't heard Jeff Beck
[Guest]: doing Nithin Soni's Nadia,
[Guest]: please check that out.
[Guest]: That's one of the finest bits
[Guest]: of guitar playing.
[Guest]: There's another one he did
[Guest]: called Where Were You,
[Guest]: which I think is like
[Guest]: one of the toughest things to play
[Guest]: because he's playing melodies
[Guest]: using the whammy bar
[Guest]: and that thing is like
[Guest]: notoriously tough to control
[Guest]: exactly in pitch,
[Guest]: but he manages to do it.
[Guest]: So it's like these little bit of,
[Guest]: you know, like the gods
[Guest]: have visited us,
[Guest]: you know, and that sort of thing.
[Guest]: Again, like when I can't figure out
[Guest]: how it's done,
[Guest]: it just like,
[Guest]: I can't figure out that magic trick
[Guest]: which makes it like more incredible.
[Guest]: That sort of thing.
[Guest]: Apart from that,
[Guest]: let me see.
[Guest]: If you haven't heard
[Guest]: Aranjoy Sarkar,
[Guest]: he's one of the finest
[Guest]: blues guitar players.
[Guest]: That's what a blues guitar player does.
[Guest]: I'm not a blues guitar player
[Guest]: by any standard.
[Guest]: I play the blues,
[Guest]: but I'm not a blues man.
[Guest]: So if you want to listen to
[Guest]: authentic, bonafide
[Guest]: blues guitar player,
[Guest]: I'd say Aranjoy
[Guest]: and Rudy Walang, of course.
[Guest]: He's been keeping that style alive
[Guest]: for years.
[Guest]: With regards to
[Guest]: more commercial stuff that
[Guest]: this is named Achint,
[Guest]: who did the scam 1992
[Guest]: and the Rocket Boys thing.
[Guest]: He's on to something cool.
[Guest]: And some of my favorite
[Guest]: indie artists,
[Guest]: Tejas, Komorevi,
[Guest]: Rohan Rajadaksha,
[Guest]: Nicholson, Sand Dunes.
[Guest]: I mean, if you see who I follow,
[Guest]: I guess on Instagram,
[Guest]: you'll kind of find all my
[Guest]: favorite musicians.
[Guest]: So check them out as well.
[Guest]: I mean, I think sometimes
[Guest]: like my main role is
[Guest]: for me to say,
[Guest]: hey, check this out.
[Guest]: You know, don't listen to
[Guest]: just me doing it.
[Guest]: This is just my way of saying,
[Guest]: listen to Jeff Beck
[Guest]: or Gary Moore,
[Guest]: whoever those guys who
[Guest]: influenced me.
[Guest]: Please go and check out
[Guest]: every single person
[Guest]: who you think influenced me.
[Guest]: Something cool there.
[Unknown]: Yeah, I think, Kamith,
[Unknown]: for the first time,
[Unknown]: you might have to actually
[Unknown]: create a Spotify playlist
[Unknown]: to share as a link
[Unknown]: on the show notes
[Guest]: to put all this together.
[Guest]: I put all Neil Young songs, bro.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And some Joni Mitchell
[Amit Varma]: to boot.
[Amit Varma]: In fact,
[Amit Varma]: Cross Peacefuls and Nash
[Amit Varma]: is like something
[Guest]: that my parents
[Guest]: used to listen to
[Guest]: because my dad used to be
[Guest]: in this short-lived
[Guest]: acoustic trio
[Guest]: with Nandu Bendi
[Guest]: and Remo Fernandez.
[Guest]: So they were like,
[Guest]: they did Cross Peacefuls
[Guest]: covers and all
[Guest]: back in the day.
[Guest]: Actually,
[Guest]: let me give a shout out
[Guest]: to my dad, man.
[Guest]: He's like an awesome guy
[Guest]: who never really,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: did music full time.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: he was in a few bands
[Guest]: of his time.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: he's one of like the finest musicians
[Guest]: you'll find.
[Guest]: But he was a guy
[Guest]: who was just comfortable
[Guest]: to provide for his family.
[Guest]: And then,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: at these family occasions,
[Guest]: he would pull out
[Guest]: the guitars.
[Guest]: But if it wasn't for him,
[Guest]: man,
[Guest]: I wouldn't be here,
[Guest]: honestly.
[Guest]: And now,
[Guest]: the Blackside Blues
[Unknown]: analogy is complete
[Unknown]: because you have
[Unknown]: the opening riff
[Unknown]: which you started
[Unknown]: with your dad,
[Unknown]: you kind of ended
[Unknown]: the interview with.
[Unknown]: Now it's perfect.
[Unknown]: Awesome.
[Amit Varma]: Great, guys.
[Amit Varma]: Warren, Chuck,
[Amit Varma]: thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: this was such a
[Amit Varma]: splendid conversation.
[Guest]: I really enjoyed this.
[Guest]: My pleasure.
[Guest]: I'm glad we're still awake
[Guest]: after all this time.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening
[Amit Varma]: to this episode,
[Amit Varma]: head on over to
[Amit Varma]: blackstratblues.com
[Amit Varma]: or follow the links
[Amit Varma]: in the show notes,
[Amit Varma]: discover Warren's music,
[Amit Varma]: and more importantly,
[Amit Varma]: support Warren's music.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Warren
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Blackstrat Blues,
[Amit Varma]: that's one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Chuck
[Amit Varma]: at Chuck underscore Gopal
[Amit Varma]: and Chuck Hay,
[Amit Varma]: thank you again
[Amit Varma]: for coming over.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma,
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse
[Amit Varma]: past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of The Scene and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at sceneunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: on any podcast app
[Amit Varma]: of your choice.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.